Bumper to Bumper
Fixing traffic in a "roundabout" way

By Charles E. Brown
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Q: While touring in Western Europe, Bruce Elliot of La Conner in Skagit County was impressed by how "roundabouts" improved traffic flow at intersections. "I recently had the pleasure of driving nearly 5,000 KM (more than 3,100 miles) through five countries. ... You encounter roundabouts everywhere ― in cities, towns, villages, and rural areas ― but very few traffic lights, or even stop signs, for that matter."

It seems, he says, Europe has adopted a philosophy of making road travel as efficient as possible, with much higher speed limits on motorways and secondary roads, and few impediments to traffic flow. It also seems that stop-and-go traffic signals more common here interrupt and impede traffic flow, wasting both time and fuel.

A roundabout was recently installed at a main three-way intersection in the La Conner area, replacing a long-standing stop sign and a couple of yield signs. Elliot says the roundabout seems to be working effectively.

"I don't know of many other installations in our area," he said, "yet they are ubiquitous throughout Western Europe."

If, indeed, roundabouts are an asset to traffic flow, why aren't more used here?

A: Roundabouts are gaining favor here, says Brian Walsh, a state Department of Transportation technical-services manager in Olympia. In fact, there are already 52 roundabouts across the state (12 in the state highway system and 40 on city or county roads), with two under construction ― one south of Duvall on Highway 203, and the other in the Cle Elum area in Central Washington.

Roundabouts are different from the more-than-700 traffic circles in Seattle neighborhoods, which are intended to slow traffic.

For one thing, Walsh points out, roundabouts have yield signs for circulating traffic, and islands to direct traffic into the circle. Also, he noted, the smallest roundabout in the state is much larger than any of Seattle's neighborhood traffic circles. In fact, Seattle has no roundabouts yet.

"We, as a state, are very open to roundabouts as a traffic-safety control device," Walsh said, adding that nearly two dozen more will be built in the next two to four years.

Washington, he said, is one of six states nationally to have built at least 50 roundabouts. The others are Maryland, Kansas, Florida, Colorado and Utah.




He said studies have shown that the public generally tends to be skeptical of roundabouts before they're built but grows to like them.

Q: Pam and David Lodefink, Arlington residents new to Snohomish County, say that in traveling Interstate 5 between Arlington and Seattle several times a week, it seems that no matter the day there's heavy traffic backup on the freeway northbound through Everett.

Could it be that the left-lane offramp to downtown Everett is causing some slowing even if other offramps seem to move smoothly?

What gives?

A: According to Myly Posse, a state Department of Transportation spokeswoman, the state, as early as fall 2005, will begin work on a $220 million, 11-mile project to widen I-5 through Everett, one of the worst chokepoints in Western Washington.

Car-pool lanes will be added in each direction of the freeway between the Boeing Freeway (Highway 526) and the Hewitt Avenue Trestle (Highway 2). The state also plans to build an additional lane between 41st Street and Highway 2, turning a three-lane stretch of interstate into five lanes.

In addition, ramp meters will be added to all exits and onramps, and road sensors and traffic cameras to help transportation engineers better manage traffic flow.

Motorists will be able to get real-time traffic information from the department's Web site, Posse said. The state has information on the project at www.wsdot.wa.gov/projects/sr526us2hov/.

Q: Noting that some freeway car-pool lanes are open to all traffic between 7 p.m. and 5 a.m., Eric Englund of Federal Way wants to know if those lanes then become the fast/passing lane during those hours?

A: State Department of Transportation traffic engineer Leslie Forbis says the left lane of any roadway with more than two lanes is always reserved as a passing lane, and "this applies to those car-pool lanes that open to all traffic between the hours of 7 p.m. and 5 a.m."

Got a traffic- related question or comment? E-mail bumper@seattletimes.com or call Charles E. Brown at 206-464-2206. Please include your name and city if you agree to publication.



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Saturday, July 10, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

State OKs ferry plan to serve Kingston

By Susan Gilmore
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Passenger-ferry service between Kingston and downtown Seattle could begin Oct. 1 with yesterday's approval by the state Utilities and Transportation Commission of a permit for Aqua Express to operate.

"It's great. We're very, very excited," said Darrel Bryan, general manager for Clipper Navigation, which joined with Argosy Cruises, Nichols Brothers Boat Builders and Tom Tougas, who runs a boat-tour company in Alaska, to form Aqua Express. It bought the 292-passenger state ferry Tyee, which will be the flagship of the operation.

"I won the pool," Bryan added. He said he had a $50 wager with his partners about when the ruling would come out and his date, July 30, was the earliest pick.

The private venture was triggered by a Kitsap County vote last November that overwhelmingly rejected a ballot measure to pay for passenger-only service.

The Kitsap Transit Board in March voted to allow private operators to seek state permission to operate. That was required because Kitsap Transit had the exclusive right to two routes and needed to relinquish it for the private operators to apply.

"There is a substantial need for the proposed passenger-only ferry service between Kingston and Seattle, and a strong desire by the public for such a service," the commission said in its ruling.

The commission received more than 50 comments from the public on the Aqua Express proposal, overwhelmingly in favor of the permit.

The permit application gained strength recently when the Inlandboatmen's Union (IBU), which had protested the Aqua Express permit, withdrew its objection. It was the only objection filed with the commission on the proposal. The IBU said it expects the service to fail financially and doesn't want to spend the money fighting it.

The IBU represents workers on the state ferries and asserted the new service could harm the state ferry system by "skimming the cream off" the state ferry runs.

The Utilities and Transportation Commission (UTC) said it considered the issues raised by the union, even though the protest was withdrawn.




In its filing with the UTC, Aqua Express estimates it will serve 284,000 passengers a year and generate nearly $1.6 million in revenue.

Aqua Express said it would charge passengers $5.25 one way, with discounted monthly passes.

Another company, Kitsap Ferry, is proposing passenger-ferry service between Bremerton and downtown Seattle. It has received a temporary permit from the UTC and plans to begin service next month. Kitsap Ferry proposes a $7 one-way fare from Bremerton.

Both companies said they will begin service during peak commuting time only. Aqua Express proposes its first boat would leave Kingston at 5:30 a.m. The last boat would leave Seattle at 7:20 p.m.

The two companies made bids for the foot-ferry service when the state last year dropped passenger-only services for all routes ― except those serving Vashon Island ― because they weren't financially viable.

Bryan said Aqua Express still needs other permits before it can begin service. The company plans to run its ferry from the fishing pier at Kingston to the Argosy Cruises dock in downtown Seattle, but needs permits from the Army Corps of Engineers and the state Department of Fisheries before it can begin service.

Susan Gilmore: 206-464-2054 or sgilmore@seattletimes.com

Marysville man dies in freeway crash


Times Snohomish County bureau

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
EVERETT ― A 67-year-old Marysville man died last Tuesday night after his sport-utility vehicle struck a freeway barrier. John Weewie apparently suffered some type of medical condition just before his vehicle struck two other cars on Interstate 5 near Highway 526 at 9:58 p.m. After hitting the cars, Weewie's vehicle drove off the roadway and stopped after striking the jersey barrier, said State Patrol Trooper Lance Ramsay.

Ramsay said the other drivers were not injured.

The Snohomish County Medical Examiner's Office will perform an autopsy to determine what caused the man's death.

Freeway initiative campaign takes exit

By Eric Pryne
Seattle Times staff reporter



Kemper Freeman Jr. spent big in pushing for initiative.

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

After spending more than $300,000, Bellevue Square owner Kemper Freeman Jr. and other backers of Initiative 883 have dropped their quest to collect enough signatures to get the ambitious freeway-construction measure on the November ballot.

Campaign manager Brett Bader said sponsors are leaning toward refiling the proposal as an initiative to the 2005 Legislature.

Bader said the campaign decided to stop gathering signatures largely because the Regional Transportation Investment District (RTID) board decided earlier this month not to place a three-county package of transportation projects and taxes on the November ballot.

I-883 was designed to complement the RTID package, Bader said. By itself, he added, "Initiative 883 does some good things, but not everything the region needs."

Bader's announcement yesterday came as a surprise. Through May, the I-883 campaign had collected and spent more money than all but one other initiative seeking a spot on the fall ballot.

Freeman commissioned the research that was I-883's foundation, and he provided about 90 percent of the $353,000 the campaign raised. He has maintained for years that an ambitious program to build more freeway lanes would do much to relieve traffic congestion in King, Snohomish and Pierce counties.

I-883 would have provided billions for new lanes statewide ― not by raising taxes, but by diverting sales, gas and vehicle-tax revenues the state now uses to pay for other programs.

It also targeted the state's network of HOV lanes. It would have immediately opened all lanes to solo drivers except during peak periods, and ultimately ended all restrictions on at least some lanes.

Bader said that by early this month, the campaign had collected about half of the 197,000 signatures required by the July 2 deadline. There's no question it would have qualified for the November ballot if work had continued, he added.

But the RTID board's June 3 decision changed the political landscape, Bader said: "There's a lot of people scratching their heads and saying, 'What next?' "




Peter Hurley, executive director of the pro-transit Transportation Choices Coalition, didn't buy that explanation, saying he suspects I-883 sponsors backed off because they concluded voters would reject such a freeway-heavy plan.

"This is the end of an era," Hurley said. "The dinosaur is dead."

State Transportation Secretary Doug MacDonald was a critic of I-883, labeling an early draft "wacky." He said yesterday that the campaign's decision not to try to qualify for November provides more time to craft a balanced, consensus transportation package rather than pitting transit and road advocates against each other.

The RTID board backed away from a November vote after big business said it wouldn't fund a campaign, citing a private poll that reportedly showed voters aren't inclined to support tax increases this year.

Bader said I-883's backers may propose their own regional plan to the board. It could include some transit, he added.

If supporters refile I-883 as an initiative to the Legislature, they would have until Dec. 31 to collect 197,000 valid voter signatures.

After that the Legislature could adopt the measure, making it law without a public vote. If it doesn't act, the proposal would appear on the November 2005 ballot.

The Legislature also could pass an alternative that would appear on the ballot with the initiative, allowing voters to choose one ― or reject both.

Eric Pryne: 206-464-2231 or epryne@seattletimes.com


Wednesday, June 16, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Arlington
Transportation projects still looking for money

By Peyton Whitely
Times Snohomish County bureau

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

ARLINGTON ― A new transportation-improvement plan offers a glimpse at what this city's streets may look like in six years.

But only if money can be found to fund the more than two dozen projects outlined in the plan.

As anyone in municipal government can attest, that is a rather big if.

Nonetheless, the plan will be the subject of a City Council public hearing at 7 p.m. Monday.

"All of this is funding-dependent," City Engineer Paul Richart said of the projects on the list.

To learn more


A summary of the projects on Arlington's six-year transportation-improvement plan is available at City Hall, 238 N. Olympic Ave. Summaries also will be available at Monday's 7 p.m. City Council hearing in Hadley Hall at the Community Youth Center, 18513 59th Ave. N.E.


That can be a test of patience.

The second project on the list, for example, is a nearly half-mile stretch of Olympic Avenue, from Division Street to Maple Street, described as a full reconstruction, including utilities.

"That's been on our list for at least 10 years," Richart said. Now it's shown with an earliest-possible construction start as January 2007.

Redoing Olympic Avenue, the city's main north-south street and the key element of the downtown area, has been a goal for years.

At times, the windows of City Hall have been festooned with an assortment of photos and sketches showing how such a redone downtown could look, depicting new streetlights and benches.

But finding money to pay for the project always has been the issue, Richart said, and a variety of sources have been considered, including applying for grants, selling bonds and forming a local improvement district.

Several other major projects also are part of the six-year plan, including one that is proceeding, the rebuilding of the Smokey Point freeway interchange.

A mix of federal, state and local money is being used to make improvements there, changing a narrow two-lane bridge across Interstate 5 into a five-lane structure that is expected to greatly ease traffic backups trying to get to southbound I-5.

Other projects include several improvements to the Centennial Trail, a former railroad bed that's being converted to recreational use, and a pedestrian bridge over Highway 9 from Eaglefield Drive to Crown Ridge Boulevard, which is expected to help access to the new Arlington High School, with work planned to start in January.

Peyton Whitely: 206-464-2259 or pwhitely@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Here and Now
Focus on the future




</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Free classes start this week for students needing information about applying for college. The Northwest Education Loan Association is offering the one-hour seminars at its Center for Student Success, 190 Queen Anne Ave. N. Advance registration is required. For online registration: www.centerforstudentsuccess.org, or call 206-461-5366 or toll-free 877-635-2669.

Book giveaway

Seattle actors under the auspices of the Screen Actors Guild Foundation will perform free readings this summer to promote an interest in reading. Each child who attends will get a free book.

The actors are affiliated with a volunteer organization called BookPALS ― Performing Artists for Literacy in Schools ― whose mission is to spread the love of books and the hope of literacy. Information can be found online at www.bookpals.net; click on "Seattle Branch."

The next performances will be Saturday, 1:30 to 2:30 p.m., at South Park Community Center, 8319 Eighth Ave. S.; and Sunday, noon to 1 p.m., at Third Place Commons, 17171 Bothell Way N.E. in Lake Forest Park Towne Centre.

Performances also are scheduled July 17 at noon at Rainier Community Center, 4600 38th Ave. S.; July 24 at noon at Rainier Beach Community Center, 8825 Rainier Ave. S.; and July 31 at noon at Columbia City Starbucks, 4824 Rainier Ave. S.

Highway open house

The state Department of Transportation will sponsor an open house tomorrow to discuss a Highway 516 project near Covington and Maple Valley.

In about two years, the state plans to widen a stretch of Highway 516, adding a two-way left-turn lane and shoulders and sidewalks to improve safety. As part of the widening, the state may acquire right of way from property owners bordering the highway.

The open house will be from 4 p.m. to 8 p.m. at the Cornerstone Methodist Church, 20730 S.E. 272nd St., in Covington. Those attending can talk with project staff members, view displays and discuss property acquisition.




Traffic watch

61 Seattle: Overnight lane closures on Interstate 5 are anticipated this week just south of downtown for completion of an earthquake-safety project. Some traffic delays are anticipated.

61 Evergreen Point Floating Bridge: The bridge will be closed for annual maintenance Friday through Monday morning.

Included in the closure is Highway 520 between Montlake Boulevard Northeast in Seattle and 92nd Avenue Northeast on the Eastside from 11:59 p.m. Friday to 5 a.m. Monday. The southbound Interstate 5 ramp to eastbound Highway 520 also will close at 11:59 p.m. Friday through 11:30 p.m. Saturday. The northbound I-5 ramp to eastbound Highway 520 will be closed from 4:30 a.m. to 9 a.m. Saturday.

Drivers crossing Lake Washington should use Interstate 90, Interstate 405 or Highway 522 (Lake City Way) during the 520 closure. Delays throughout the weekend are likely.

61 Seattle: Resealing work on several city streets will begin tomorrow. Crews will be "chip sealing" ― making street repairs with asphalt and rock ― along Delridge Way Southwest in West Seattle. In the Northgate area, no-parking signs will be posted in work areas up to 24 hours in advance, with typical work hours from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. weekdays, and traffic restrictions from 7 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.

61 Mill Creek: Work will start soon on the final stretch of the Bothell-Everett Highway (Highway 527) project, and some lane closures during the next month are anticipated.

Highway 527 is being widened from two to five lanes between 164th Street Southeast and 132nd Street Southeast.

Here & Now is compiled by Seattle Times staff reporter Charles E. Brown and news assistant Suesan Whitney Henderson. To submit an item, e-mail herenow@seattletimes.com or call 206-464-2226.



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Guest columnist
Gray days for intercity travelers

By Cassandra Tate
Special to The Times


AP A Greyhound bus motors down an American highway.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Rural America took another kick in the teeth last month when Greyhound ― the iconic bus company that told us for years to leave the driving to them ― announced that it was abandoning 260 small towns between Seattle and Chicago, including 21 in Washington state.

Among the towns in Washington that will be eliminated from the Greyhound route map are Richland (population 47,000), Walla Walla (32,000) and North Bend (population 4,750, home of the café and bus stop where Agent Dale Cooper bought his cherry pie on the TV series "Twin Peaks"). In all, more than 170,000 Washingtonians will lose their access to regularly scheduled intercity bus service as of mid-August.

This is only the opening round in what Greyhound calls "stabilizing the corridor." Company officials say they will make similar cuts in other regions in the next two to three years. Henceforth, Greyhound will focus on its most profitable routes, primarily those between major cities.

For America's small towns, the road is not only less traveled, but weeded over. Few such communities are fortunate enough to have airports, and if air service is available, it's expensive. The railroad tracks have long since rusted out. Greyhound was the last form of public transportation available to people who wanted to get to, or get out of, town. Now, if you don't own a car or can't drive for some other reason, it's either beg your neighbor for a ride or stay put.

Greyhound blames the cutbacks on a sluggish national economy and post-9-11 anxiety about traveling. The terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, have become a convenient scapegoat for many corporations seeking to explain lackluster financial performance to disgruntled investors. In fact, Greyhound's economic woes could more properly be laid on the altar of deregulation.

Greyhound Lines Inc., founded in 1914 as the Mesaba Transportation Company in Hibbing, Minn., profited mightily from regulatory policies adopted by the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC). The commission had the power to set rates, assign routes, manage labor disputes and approve mergers and buyouts among "common carriers" involved in interstate surface transportation. The ICC encouraged consolidation among bus companies, under the rationale that larger companies could use profits from strong markets to subsidize service to weaker ones. By the 1950s, Greyhound had bought out most of its competitors. In return, it accepted an obligation to serve all customers on its licensed routes, not just those living in lucrative markets.

Beginning in the 1980s, Congress repudiated the argument that public agencies should regulate the behavior of private companies, even those that provide key public services. One of the first targets was the ICC ― the nation's first regulatory agency, established in 1887 to curb abuses in the railroad industry. The commission lost its authority over intercity bus rates and routes in 1981. (It was finally abolished in 1995.)

Greyhound responded to deregulation with a series of profit-driven decisions that ultimately weakened the company. Among them was a long and damaging price war with Trailways Inc., the company's only remaining nationwide competitor. Greyhound bought out Trailways in 1987, but it never fully regained its economic equilibrium.

The company faced additional financial challenges in the 1990s, including a three-year strike by drivers and mechanics, increasing competition from discount airlines, a sojourn in bankruptcy court and a leveraged buyout by Canadian-based Laidlaw International Inc. The flow of red ink has persisted despite downsizing, restructuring, changes in management, cutbacks in service and the replacement of high-cost, full-time, unionized employees with low-cost contractors and part-timers.

These strategies ignore both Greyhound's roots and what could be the source of its continued viability. The company was born as a "jitney" service, established by a young Swedish-born miner who added some extra seats to his Hupmobile and used it to ferry passengers between Hibbing and Alice, two small towns in Minnesota's iron-mining district. Neither of the towns, incidentally, is still served by Greyhound.

By eliminating stops in smaller markets in an effort to provide faster service between major cities, Greyhound is grabbing for a bone already in the grasp of discount airlines. The company, and the nation, would be better served by a return to the original Greyhound business model. Focus on feeder routes ― getting people from the little towns to the population centers. Retire most of those diesel-burning, 60-passenger "Scenicruisers" and replace them with mini-buses. Dust off the old mission statement, which promised that Greyhound would provide the opportunity for anyone to travel anywhere in America with "safety, dignity, and conven-ience."

The sleek gray dog is still one of the most recognizable logos in American business. It's part of the landscape of this country, a cultural touchstone that represents both freedom and connection. For more than half a century, Greyhound was a ticket to wherever a little money and your dreams would take you. If that era is ending, gray days are ahead not only for those places where the bus doesn't stop anymore, but for the rest of us as well. Any time one community loses its connection to other communities, we all become a little more isolated and a little more narrow.

Cassandra Tate is a staff historian at www.historylink.org. She lives in Seattle.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Guest columnist
We should levitate our thinking about ground-transit systems

By Kevin C. Coates
Special to The Times


AP The world's first commercial maglev train leaves Shanghai's Pudong International Airport in December 2002 for a trial run to the city's Pudong financial district.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
During a recent visit to Shanghai, I "flew" 19 miles in 7-05 minutes above snarled traffic. I was aboard a high-speed magnetic levitation (maglev) transportation system. Ever since, I've been pondering more efficient ways of moving people into, between, within and around American cities ― especially when I am stuck in traffic jams and miss a flight.

Deteriorating travel conditions are not unique to Seattle and indeed are playing out daily all across the country. How many of us see the irony in local trips taking longer each year in spite of the billions of dollars spent on highway improvements?

Let's face it, America's present transportation problems result from our widespread love of private automobile ownership and the government policies that enable our prodigious oil addiction. Yet, as our population centers urbanize, cars have become excess baggage.

If we can endure being crammed and sealed into mass-transit airliners for hours, why do we resist funding more comfortable, efficient, quiet and reliable transit on the ground?

Rather than look to subways, trolley (light-rail) systems, or slow rubber-tire monorails, we should be looking tomaglevs to meet our present transportation needs, as well as the more crowded future. Why does a country with a tradition of high-tech accomplishments look to old "proven" transit solutions, complete with their "proven" high capital, operating and maintenance costs?



Kevin C. Coates



America's ground-transit systems are mostly slow, bouncy, manually operated, expensive to maintain, prone to frequent breakdowns, and they come with high labor costs. As wheels (or tires) meet track, friction takes its toll.

While maglevs are not completely free of maintenance, logic dictates that their use of computer-controlled electro-magnetic waves for propulsion, braking, suspension and guidance enables them to dramatically reduce operating and maintenance costs and increase system reliability.

The high-speed (267 mph) German-built maglev in Shanghai is smooth and much faster than highway or traditional rail travel, fast enough in fact to compete with air trips of 600 miles or less. This means deploying maglevs could eliminate the need for up to 50 percent of all domestic air travel and the need for further airport expansion ― contrary to a recently published U.S. Department of Transportation report recommending expanded airport capacity. Regardless, rising oil prices will make the case for intercity maglev routes.

A lower-speed (60 mph, with 100 mph coming) maglev is just about complete east of Nagoya, Japan, and will shuttle passengers to nine stations along a 5.6-mile route. This elevated maglev system is ideal for tight urban landscapes with restricted rights of way and frequent stops. It can negotiate tighter turns than higher-speed systems and silently "flies over" communities and highways ― and would be even quieter and faster than Seattle's planned new monorail line.

If Sound Transit were using a lower-speed maglev instead of light-rail transit, its proposed LINK tunnel bores would be smaller and less costly and would eliminate the extensive rail vibration concerns next to the University of Washington.

In light of the controversy surrounding an expanded Sound Transit light-rail system, it might make sense to seriously look into how these maglev systems can better meet the needs of the city's present and future (i.e., larger) population.

An elevated maglev dual-guideway system can simply add vehicles and/or increase the frequency of trains without exacerbating automobile traffic jams around non-existent at-grade crossings or requiring additional guideway construction on an established route. Obviously, safety is improved as well.

In contrast, widening highways to expand capacity disrupts and snarls traffic during construction, takes years to complete and costs billions. The highways often suffer overuse as soon as construction ends. Expanded light-rail operations come at the cost of disrupting automobile traffic flows.

Obviously, the big question is how to pay for new maglev transit networks, not just single lines. Many U.S. maglev projects are using public/private partnerships and innovative funding mechanisms. When Congress finally comes to terms with the severity of world oil supply pressures, it could fund maglev intercity routes by diverting tens of billions of dollars from planned airport expansion projects ― better positioning America for an energy-independent future and travel less affected by inclement weather.

The technology now exists to effectively and flexibly meet our burgeoning transportation needs. What we need now is the public will and the political leadership to improve our reality.

Kevin C. Coates is a Washington, D.C., transportation and energy consultant. He is working on a book about the energy and societal implications of maglev technology.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Friday, July 09, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Monorail remains possibility for Sound Transit

By Eric Pryne
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
A monorail above the bicycles on the Burke-Gilman Trail? A monorail extension south from West Seattle to Des Moines? They're just ideas, still at the back-of-the-envelope stage. But they're among the ideas Sound Transit will explore as it begins piecing together a second round of regional transit projects to submit to King, Snohomish and Pierce county voters.

"Sound Transit" and "monorail" are words that usually don't appear in the same sentence. Some Sound Transit officials have been critical of Seattle's proposed 14-mile monorail line. Sound Transit planners and consultants recommended last month that the agency not consider monorail in its long-range plans.

Yesterday, however, the Sound Transit board rejected that advice, directing planners to keep monorail on the table ― at least for now.

The board only voted to study monorail, not build it. Decisions on what to include in the next regional transit package won't be made until next spring at the earliest. Board Chairman John Ladenburg, the Pierce County executive, said he thinks Sound Transit ultimately will focus on expanding the three "lines of business" it already operates: express buses, commuter rail and light rail.

But Ladenburg also said that "if there's going to be a regional monorail, we ought to be the developer of it."

Cleve Stockmeyer, a member of the Seattle Monorail Project board and chairman of Citizens for King County Monorail, welcomed the board's decision.

"I think this is a good move on their part," he said. "They're beginning to accept the idea that monorail is viable."

And its backers are vocal. About one-third of the public comments Sound Transit got on its planning process recommended the agency study monorail.

Sound Transit has begun planning the next round of regional transit improvements even though the first round, approved by voters in 1996, hasn't yet been completed. The agency is building a 14-mile light-rail line from downtown Seattle through the Rainier Valley to Tukwila. It also has plans ― but not money ― to extend that line south to SeaTac and north through the University District to Northgate.

On a separate track, Seattle plans to build a monorail from Ballard through downtown to West Seattle. City voters approved money for the line in 2002.




Yesterday, Sound Transit board member Jack Crawford, a Kenmore city councilman, suggested Sound Transit planners study a monorail line above the Burke-Gilman Trail through Lake Forest Park and Kenmore to the University of Washington Bothell campus.

Traffic on nearby Highway 522 will nearly double by 2020, he said: "We can't handle it ... We need some help." The corridor doesn't have the population to justify light rail, Crawford said, but monorail "seems very feasible to us."

From the Burke-Gilman ― a converted rail line ― the monorail could head west on Northeast 145th Street, then south along Interstate 5 to the future light-rail station at Northgate, Crawford said.

Metropolitan King County Councilwoman Julia Patterson, D-SeaTac, another Sound Transit board member, suggested planners also explore extending the Seattle monorail south through White Center, Burien and Normandy Park to Des Moines, perhaps linking up with light rail in SeaTac.

She said some of her constituents have expressed interest in the route. "That part of King County is not being served" by Sound Transit's first-phase projects, Patterson said.

Other board members offered other ideas. King County Executive Ron Sims suggested a monorail extension from Ballard to Northgate, already part of the Seattle Monorail Project's long-range vision.

Issaquah City Councilman Fred Butler raised monorail as a possibility for the Eastside's little-used Burlington Northern Santa Fe right-of-way between Renton and Woodinville.

The board's decision to consider monorail came over the objections of People for Modern Transit, a pro-light rail group. Monorail's operating costs are higher than light rail, said President Richard Borkowski, and even studying it is a waste.

At yesterday's meeting, the Sound Transit board also directed agency planners to:

61 Study extending Seattle Mayor Greg Nickels' proposed South Lake Union streetcar north to the University District.

61 Explore "bus rapid transit" ― bus service with many of the characteristics of rail ― along Highway 99 in North King and South Snohomish counties.

61 Stick with earlier decisions to focus on bus rapid transit for the Interstate 405 and Highway 520 corridors.

Eric Pryne: 206-464-2231 or epryne@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Saturday, July 03, 2004 - Page updated at 12:15 A.M.

States hit road block on gas-tax disbursal

By Jim Abrams
The Associated Press

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>

Other links
 Gas Gauge: analysis, tips and great escapes



WASHINGTON ― The question of which states pay the most in gasoline taxes and which get the most money back is rekindling a perennial battle as Congress and the White House scuffle over a huge spending bill to finance highway and mass-transit programs.

Drivers have long helped finance road construction and repair by paying 18.4 cents in federal tax for every gallon of gas they buy, money that goes into the highway trust fund. More than half of Americans ― 56 percent ― would be willing to pay even higher gasoline taxes if the money were used for significant road and mass-transit improvements, according to a poll by The Associated Press.

However, about half the states say they aren't getting what they pay for, and their drivers are sending more money to Washington than Washington is returning in highway grants.

The last six-year highway program, worth $218 billion, expired in September. It has been provisionally extended because of an inability to settle two key questions about its successor: How much? And who gets the money?

The size of the pot must be decided before it can be divided. Negotiators are faced with a $318 billion Senate bill, a $284 billion House bill and a White House that is threatening a veto of anything that goes much beyond $256 billion over six years.

Even if the amount is settled, there won't be a bill unless donor states ― those paying more into the trust fund than they get back ― are satisfied.

"It's the No. 1 priority for many of us," said House Majority Leader Tom DeLay, R-Texas, whose state over the past six years received about 90 cents in highway money for every $1 its motorists paid in gasoline taxes.

Rep. Baron Hill, D-Ind., with DeLay a leader in pushing for state equity, said that when the trust fund was established in 1956, the main goal was to build the Interstate Highway System, originally promoted as a Cold War defense tool. Less-populated Western states got a much better rate of return.

Alaska, for example, reaped $6.40 in highway money for every $1 of gasoline tax paid by its motorists from 1998 through most of 2003.




Washington state is at the break-even point, receiving about the same amount of federal money that its motorists pay in federal gas tax, according to SHARE data. The States Highway Alliance for Real Equity (SHARE) a coalition of donor states, finds 24 donor states in the 1998-2003 period, using rate-of-return calculations different from those used by the Federal Highway Administration.

This year's Senate-passed bill would ensure that every state would get back at least 95 cents by the time the legislation has expired in 2009.

The lists of donor and donee states vary slightly depending on the calculation. Generally, the donors include big, fast-growing states such as California, Texas and Florida and heavily traveled states in the South and Midwest.

Getting the guarantee up to 95 percent will be close to impossible unless Congress and the White House can agree on a bill that would approach the higher $318 billion sought by the Senate.

The American Road & Transportation Builders Association estimates that, under a $275 billion bill, a 95 percent guarantee would mean that the District of Columbia and 22 donee states would face real cuts from the previous six-year program, with inflation factored in.

Representatives from donee states dispute the claims of unfairness and say they will fight any bill that would reduce their slice of the pie. New York, which according to the government, had a $1.23 rate of return, has invested billions in its mass-transit system, and its drivers thus use less gas, said Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y.

More than 2 cents of the federal tax on each gallon is devoted to mass transit. Still, shrinking his state's share of highway money "would be the same as being punished for being energy efficient," Nadler said. "It's completely perverse."

He said lawmakers should look at the big picture: New York sends far more in taxes to Washington than it gets back.

"If everybody gets back what they put in," Nadler said, "what's the point of the federal government?"

Sheriff's deputy injured in traffic accident near Maple Valley

By Emily Heffter
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
MAPLE VALLEY ― A King County Sheriff's deputy was in serious condition this morning after his police car collided with a semi-truck just north of Maple Valley early this morning. The 2 a.m. accident at the intersection of Southeast 216th Way and the Maple Valley Highway caused the highway to be closed in both directions until about 8:30 this morning, said Sgt. John Urquhart, spokesman for the sheriff's office.

The 32-year-old deputy was responding to a report of a man with a gun when the accident occurred. He was making a left turn onto southbound Maple Valley Highway and the semi-truck "T-boned" his marked police car, Urquhart said. The truck driver was not injured.

The intersection has a traffic light. There were no witnesses to the accident, according to Urquhart, so some details weren't immediately known, including whether the deputy was using his lights and siren, how fast the vehicles were going and who had the right-of-way.

The deputy was taken to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle, where was initially listed in critical condition. His condition was upgraded to serious at 5 a.m.

Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Local Digest
Ferry is delayed after car goes off deck




</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
A man attempting to drive off the ferry Chelan put his car in reverse and rocketed off the vessel into the water yesterday, temporarily reducing ferry service from the San Juan Islands on the last day of the busy Fourth of July weekend. The man suffered minor injuries, but the Chelan was stalled for nearly two hours while divers assessed the risk posed by his submerged car, said spokeswoman Susan Harris-Huether of Washington State Ferries.

The Chelan, with an "extremely light" load, then moved slowly around the car and went back into service. That ferry and two others serving Anacortes and the islands will use other slips at Anacortes "until we can get that car out of there," Harris-Huether said.

When the driver hit the gas to debark, "he went backward instead of forward with enough speed that he broke through the chain in the back of the boat," Harris-Huether said. The car landed 40 to 50 yards from the vessel, she said. Washington State Patrol identified the driver as 38-year-old David J. Polson of New York City.

The ferry crew rescued him, and he was taken to Island Hospital in Anacortes. Harris-Huether said the man had a broken arm and suffered from hypothermia.

Maple Valley

Deputy seriously hurt in collision with truck

A King County sheriff's deputy was in serious condition yesterday after his patrol car was struck by a semi-truck just north of Maple Valley.

The 2 a.m. accident at Southeast 216th Way and the Maple Valley Highway caused the highway to be closed in both directions until about 8:30 yesterday morning, said Sgt. John Urquhart, spokesman for the Sheriff's Office.

The 32-year-old deputy, whose name was not released, was responding to a report of a man with a gun when the accident occurred. He was making a left turn onto southbound Maple Valley Highway when his patrol car was "T-boned" by the semi-truck, Urquhart said. The truck driver, whose identity was unknown, was not injured.

The intersection has a traffic light. There were no witnesses to the accident, according to Urquhart, so some details weren't immediately known, including whether the deputy was using his lights and siren, how fast the vehicles were going and who had the right-of-way.




The deputy was taken to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle, where he initially was listed in critical condition. His condition was upgraded to serious at 5 a.m.

Startup

Man presumed dead in rafting accident

An 18-year-old man was presumed drowned after he apparently went over a waterfall in a rubber raft Sunday on the Skykomish River near Startup, Snohomish County.

The man and his brother, who is 15 or 16, were trying out a raft they had bought at a garage sale earlier that day when the raft flipped over, said Snohomish County Sheriff's Office spokeswoman Jan Jorgensen. Their names were not released.

Both brothers clung to the raft as it headed for Canyon Falls, an approximately 50-foot waterfall surrounded by rocky cliffs. The younger boy made it to shore and said he saw the empty raft at the bottom of the falls. The older brother's body had not been found yesterday.

The two were not wearing life jackets, Jorgensen said.

Snohomish

Man marks 94 years with leap from plane

Once was not enough for Steven Eastman. After leaping out of an airplane with a parachute on his 94th birthday, he was ready to go skydiving again.

Clad in polyester pants and wingtip shoes, sporting a beret and braided beard, the retired Boeing worker from Renton realized a five-year dream when he took the plunge Sunday to the delight ― and relief ― of his watching children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

"I did it!" Eastman exclaimed. "I want to do it again."

Strapped to a skydiving instructor, Eastman jumped out of the plane 12,000 feet over Harvey Field, spent a minute in free fall, then popped the chute..

Making similar tandem jumps with him were his son and a granddaughter. He's the second-oldest person to skydive at Harvey Field. The oldest was a 98-year-old Snohomish man.

"Am I a daredevil?" said Eastman, who wears a heart pacemaker. "Nowadays it's a daredevil thing just to live every day."

Portland

NOAA backs plan to reduce dam spills

A federal agency is backing the Bonneville Power Administration's (BPA) plan to reduce the amount of water spilled over dams on the Columbia and Snake rivers this summer.

Water that's spilled bypasses the power generators at dams, but helps speed juvenile fish along their way downstream.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Fisheries said reducing the spill should result in no net loss of fish because of other steps proposed by the BPA.

Under the plan, spills will stop a month early at Bonneville and The Dalles dams and six days early at the Ice Harbor Dam on the Snake River. As an offset, the BPA would buy water stored by Idaho Power. That water would be released to help threatened salmon move downstream.

BPA wants the changes in order to generate more electricity for sales to California utilities. A tribal confederation has said it will sue the BPA to prevent it from reducing the spills.

Times staff and news services



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Oregon to test mileage tax as replacement for gas tax

By Eric Pryne
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
CORVALLIS, Ore. ― Let's pretend someone waves a magic wand and turns every car into a fuel-sipping, gas-electric hybrid. What difference would it make? The air would be cleaner.

Oil imports would drop.

And the transportation budgets of Oregon, Washington and almost every other state would deflate like a punctured balloon.

Think about it: Most money for highway construction and maintenance comes from state and federal taxes on gasoline. If people bought a lot less gas, highways would get a lot less money.

In Oregon, a state task force has concluded this scenario isn't all that far-fetched. It has proposed a possible long-term replacement for the gas tax, something no one has tried before:

A tax based on how many miles you drive.

The Oregon Road User Fee Task Force has spent two years fleshing out the concept, thinking through how such a tax might be calculated and collected. Now it's ready to test its ideas in the real world.

At the panel's request, Oregon State University researchers have developed technology that can distinguish miles driven in Oregon from those driven elsewhere, then allow a mileage tax to be calculated and paid at the pump in place of the state gas tax.

Next year, the researchers' mileage-recording devices are to be installed on 400 private cars in Eugene. Some of the volunteers will become the first people in the country to pay road taxes based not on how much fuel they burn, but on how far they travel.

A mileage tax has been discussed in Washington, too ― not as a replacement for the gas tax, but as a supplement to it. A bill allowing the Regional Transportation Investment District to propose one to King, Snohomish and Pierce county voters cleared the state House of Representatives earlier this year. It died in the Senate, in part because no one could say exactly how the tax might work.




The Oregon task force, whose work has attracted national attention, has gone a long way toward answering that question.

But even if the Eugene field test resolves the technical and administrative issues, tough policy questions about privacy, equity and the environment will remain.

"We know that, if you do this in a certain way, you can actually make it work," says Jim Whitty, the task force's administrator. "But working through these issues is very, very difficult."

Four miles for a nickel?

In 1999, Ford brought some of its alternative-fuel-concept cars to Salem, Oregon's capital, for a demonstration. Bruce Starr, then a Republican state representative from the Portland suburbs, took a spin in a $6 million fuel-cell vehicle. "I got to thinking, 'What happens when you encourage high-mileage vehicles?' " Starr remembers. "That was in some respects the genesis of this."

Starr's epiphany led him to introduce the bill that created the task force in 2001. He became its chairman.

The panel spelled out the underlying problem in a 2003 report. Cars will get more fuel efficient as gas prices continue to climb, it said. More automakers will offer hybrids. The Bush administration plans to spend $1.7 billion over five years to develop fuel-cell vehicles that run on hydrogen.

So Oregon's gas-tax revenues will gradually level off, the task force said. Around 2014, it projected, collections will actually start to drop.

The panel sifted through 27 other options before settling on the mileage tax as a replacement. The other possible revenue sources either weren't user fees, had already been claimed by local government, or wouldn't generate enough money.

It suggested a tax of 1.25 cents per mile to eventually replace the state's gas tax of 24 cents per gallon. For a car that gets average gas mileage ― 19.7 miles per gallon in Oregon ― the total tax bill would be about the same.

But few cars are average. A 2004 Honda Civic that gets 36 miles to the gallon would pay more tax than today; a 2004 Range Rover that gets 12 would pay less.

Treating them the same is fair, Whitty argues. Each vehicle uses up about the same amount of space on the highway, he says, and there's little difference in the wear and tear they inflict on roads.

Besides, he adds, the gas tax was effectively a mileage tax 40 years ago, when almost every car got eight to 12 miles to the gallon. The introduction of fuel-efficient cars shifted more of the highway-finance burden to gas guzzlers, but "there was never public policy set for that," Whitty says. "It happened by accident."

Once the task force settled on a mileage tax, it had to figure out how to make it work.

The panel quickly decided Oregonians shouldn't pay tax on miles driven out of state. The problem: Conventional odometers don't make such distinctions.

It also decided the tax should be calculated and paid at the pump, so people wouldn't have to go to a government office or deal with another bill in their mailbox. The problem: Such a collection system didn't exist.

For solutions, the panel turned to Oregon State engineering professors David Kim, a former General Motors research scientist, and David Porter, an information-technology specialist.

They set up shop in an old storage compound, installing computers and a gas-pump simulator that does everything but pump gas. For more than a year, they tested different devices on three 1991 Dodge Dynasties the state once used to collect litter.

In the spring, Porter and Kim announced they had designed a system that did everything the task force wanted.

For vehicles, they crafted a device with an electronic odometer and a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver that determines whether a car is being driven in a predetermined "zone" ― inside or outside Oregon, for instance. The miles in each zone are recorded separately.

When the car pulls into a gas station, its mileage data is uploaded by short-range radio frequency to a wireless reader. It sends the numbers to the station's computer, which, in turn, asks a central computer for information on the car's last reported mileage.

Once that data arrives, the gas-station computer does the math. It calculates new taxable miles, computes how much tax is owed and relays that information back to the pump.

All this takes about as long as a credit-card approval, Kim says. After that, the gas station's computer subtracts the gas tax from the per-gallon price displayed on the pump. You fill your tank, pay for the fuel plus the mileage tax, and drive away.

Cars that don't have the odometer-GPS devices ― older cars, out-of-state cars ― won't have any data for the reader to download. They'll continue to pay the gas tax; the task force has concluded that, while the state could reasonably require the devices on new cars, retrofitting every vehicle in Oregon would be too expensive.

The system's use of satellite-based GPS technology raises the specter of Big Brother, of government tracking where and when you drive. "If you wanted to, you could design a system that would do that," Porter acknowledges.

But he and Kim say their system doesn't; the task force didn't want anything that intrusive.

Their on-vehicle device doesn't store trip details, the professors say ― only total miles and the zones into which those miles fall. That's the only information that would be transmitted at the gas pump, they add; no one could use the technology to track you while you're driving, or reconstruct where you've been.

"All that would be stored is a number," Whitty says. "If the police wanted to go into that device, there wouldn't be anything to find."

As an added safeguard, the task force has recommended that collection and dissemination of information about a car's movements without the driver's consent be prohibited by law.

Such assurances don't satisfy David Sobel, general counsel for the Electronic Privacy Information Center in Washington, D.C. Oregon's prototype probably presents little threat to privacy, he says ― but government officials almost certainly would want something more.

The state would need a record of a car's movements to document the mileage-tax assessment if someone contested it, Sobel says: "Just from a due-process perspective, there will be pressure to retain data."

Privacy isn't the only concern. Chris Hagerbaumer, of the Oregon Environmental Council, says a mileage tax that treats a hybrid and a Hummer the same would discourage consumers from buying fuel-efficient cars.

"The gas tax sends a valuable signal," she says. "I'd hate to see that go away."

Oil companies don't like the task force's plan to collect the mileage tax at the pump, through gas stations' computers.

"They want to go into our proprietary systems," says Brian Doherty, a lobbyist for the Western States Petroleum Association. "Would you open up your million-dollar computer and let them have access to it?"

The task force hopes to install mileage-tax technology at up to five service stations next year for its Eugene field test. It may have trouble finding guinea pigs. "Until we get real comfortable with it, we're not ready to go there," Doherty says.

The task force's timetable calls for the first 20 cars to be equipped with mileage recorders next February. The experiment should be in full swing by fall 2005. Later, the technology would be used to test "congestion pricing" ― charging some drivers a higher mileage fee during rush hour, or in particularly congested areas, to see if they drive less as a result.

The test should be finished in early 2007. Then what?

If the experiment works, Whitty says, the task force probably would draft a bill proposing a statewide mileage tax. Starr, the legislator who chairs the panel, doubts it would pass right away.

He says he's comfortable with the system's privacy protections, but the public isn't yet. Cost is another big hurdle, Starr adds: The task force has calculated the on-vehicle devices might add up to $225 to the price of a new car.

It's probably unrealistic anyway for a small state like Oregon to adopt a mileage tax by itself, Starr says, but the task force's work could provide the foundation for a larger state or the federal government to take that leap.

Whitty agrees. "Oregon is the tip of the tail of the dog," he says. "It's hard to wag the dog from that vantage point."

Eric Pryne: 206-464-2231 or epryne@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Bumper to Bumper
Real mess of a merge on the Eastside

By Charles E. Brown
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Q: Did the state Department of Transportation forget to post signs along some stretches of Interstate 90 to let motorists know it's all right to use car-pool lanes at night? Bellevue resident Kevin Wood wants to know if I-90 express/carpool lanes eastbound across Mercer Island are open to all traffic after 7 p.m. east of the Island Crest Way exit. He hasn't spotted any signs there.

A: First of all, state Department of Transportation traffic engineer Leslie Forbis points out that there's a difference between I-90's express lanes and the mainline car-pool lanes. The I-90 express lanes are still restricted to two-person car-pools 24 hours a day, except for motorists exiting I-90 at Mercer Island.

The I-90 mainline car-pool lanes are now open to all traffic from 7 p.m. to 5 a.m. east of Island Crest Way.

Forbis said transportation workers checked, and, bingo: There are no signs posted. The department will have a new HOV sign posted near Island Crest Way. "You should see it in the coming weeks," Forbis said.

Q: Motorists traveling east on I-90 and headed toward Coal Creek Parkway must first exit south onto Highway 405, then merge with traffic from I-90 westbound as well as traffic already headed south on 405.

Scott Wetstone of Bellevue has noticed that there is a wide, paved section of road marked off that could be used as an "exit only" lane. So he wonders if the state Department of Transportation has thought about re-marking the marked-off section to reduce congestion where all that traffic converges. "All that is needed," he said, "is to allow Coal Creek traffic to stay to the extreme right in a designated lane so that they don't add to the merging traffic going onto 405."

A: State Department of Transportation traffic engineers agree that is a tricky area. Motorists from southbound 405 and east- and westbound I-90 are faced with choices: merge left, merge right, exit at Coal Creek Parkway or continue on 405.

Traffic engineer Don Sims says there are now two dedicated lanes from eastbound I-90 to the Coal Creek exit. If a third lane were added on the ramp, drivers would still have to merge into two lanes at 405. "That," Sims said, "would cause congestion and back-ups onto I-90."

Denise Cieri, the department's Highway 405 project manager for that area, says there's a preliminary plan to increase traffic flow and decrease the lane-switching that happens there by converting to a system of multilayered ramps that would separate I-90, I-405 and Coal Creek exit traffic. It's part of an overall plan to increase traffic flow through that entire corridor, she said. But because the project involves a series of fly-over ramps, it would be costly "and is not currently funded," she said.

Q: The intersection of Fifth Avenue Northeast and Banner Way Northeast in Seattle has a flashing four-way stop light. A large volume of traffic must stop, according to Dan Martin of Seattle, and most of it is on Banner.




"This wastes a tremendous amount of time and fuel," he says. "Is there any relief possible?"

A: After evaluating the collision history and traffic volumes at that intersection, Seattle Department of Transportation spokeswoman Liz Rankin says the department agrees that a new traffic signal would work well there. She says a study of signal options is in the making, and construction should take place next year.

That intersection, she noted, has operated as a four-way stop since 1968. Until a new signal is installed, she said, motorists should come to a complete stop at the stop line, yielding to crossing pedestrians, then proceed once other crossing vehicles have cleared the intersection.

Bumper note

A Renton parking lot that Metro Transit has been using as a park-and-ride lot will be permanently closed after Wednesday. Metro has made arrangements with the city of Renton for bus passengers to park free, starting Thursday, in Renton's new City Center Garage at 655 S. Second St., at Burnett Avenue South.

Metro had been leasing 250 parking spaces in the Renton-Rainier Avenue lot ― the old Kmart lot at 400 Rainier Ave. S. But that property is being redeveloped.

A Metro Transit spokeswoman said there will be as many as 200 park-and-ride spaces on floors 4 through 7 of the City Center Garage, and there are 150 spaces across Burnett Avenue South in the Renton Transit Center Park-and-Ride Garage. Metro routes 101 and 143 provide direct service from the transit center to downtown Seattle, and extra service was added to Route 143 earlier this month.

Got a question or comment? E-mail bumper@seattletimes.com or call Charles Brown at 206-464-2206. Please tell us your name and city if you agree to publication.



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



On the Road
East Channel Bridge light flickers toward replacement

By Natalie Singer
Seattle Times Eastside bureau

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Q.Why is there a light standard near the center of the Interstate 90 East Channel Bridge that seems to automatically turn on for about one minute and off for two minutes? Also, why can't all of the center lights on this bridge be permanently turned off in the interest of energy conservation and reduction of light pollution? A. The light above the I-90 East Channel Bridge is an older type of lamp that turns on and off when it's near the end of its life span, said state Department of Transportation spokesman Greg Phipps. He said a crew will change the light as soon as they can schedule nighttime lane closures, which are needed in order to safely install the lamp. The new light will last longer and simply will burn out when it gets old instead of flickering on and off, Phipps said.

In addition, Phipps said the East Channel Bridge (the short span between Mercer Island and Bellevue) is in an area with closely spaced onramps and exits. Lighting is particularly important in this type of location, and the state has no plans to turn off the lights because they are crucial to driver safety, he said.

Early warning

Clyde Hill: The Evergreen Point Floating Bridge (Highway 520) between 92nd Avenue Northeast and Montlake Boulevard Northeast will be closed tonight from 11:59 to 5 a.m. Monday. Crews will be performing annual maintenance work.

Redmond: A section of Novelty Hill Road between 243rd Avenue Northeast and West Snoqualmie Valley Road will be closed for four weeks beginning Monday. The closure will allow for the construction of safety improvements.

Bellevue: The southbound Interstate 405 offramp to Northeast Fourth Street will be closed to traffic tonight at 10 and reopen to traffic Monday at 6 a.m. The northbound offramp will be closed to traffic nightly, Monday through Thursday from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. the following morning.

Got an Eastside traffic question?


Send it to The Seattle Times Eastside News Bureau, 1200 112th Ave. N.E., Suite C-145, Bellevue, WA 98004. Fax: 425-453-0449. E-mail: east@seattletimes.com



Natalie Singer: 206-464-2704 or nsinger@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



James Vesely / Times editorial page editor
Escalator going up: the coming tax debates






</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
The up escalator known as the Seattle Families and Education Levy has topped off at $116 million, a tax on real estate extending seven years and awaiting ballot approval in September. That's after a campaign to convince voters it's a good thing. The idea of the levy is a good thing, and has been since Seattle Mayor Norm Rice stepped up to bring the city into tandem and financial support of its public schools. An adjunct tax, separate from the revenue stream schools already receive from the state and the financial grant system, and the hard dollars donated by parents and the PTAs, is an appropriate thing for a city to do. The vitality of Seattle is surely coupled to the viability of its public schools.

For the same reasons, the recent contract agreement in Issaquah schools and the enormous investment in Bellevue schools through the Bellevue School Foundation are signals that public schools and their cities have a shared and common destiny.

But the Seattle levy is in another league. Mayor Greg Nickels had put forward a $103 million package, a City Council committee kicked it up another $13 million and we're now at $116 million ― $34 million in this levy "renewal" over the last school tax voters passed. In 1990 and 1997, Seattle voters approved levies of $69 million. Increasing that amount, to cheering in the audience from school advocates, suggests that Seattleites can be counted on to come across with a higher tax on their homes.

The early calculations say the owner of a home assessed at $336,000 would see their taxes rise from $34 a year for the school levy to $65 a year. The trick would be to find a house in Seattle that's assessed at only $336,000.

On these pages, we will debate the content of the school levy and the fine points of it in the coming weeks. I ask now for a discussion of how we vote for taxes, not how much the taxes should be.

For Seattle voters, add in the monorail tax on cars and trucks, add in the county parks levy and the state and county taxes, library, the EMS, a gas-tax hike of a nickel, the Seattle housing levy, Sound Transit and other taxes and pretty soon the picture is not about $65 a year but some other fuzzy number that is never quite nailed down.

Voters statewide will also see another education request on the ballot in November. That's the $1 billion fund for education assessed through another penny on the sales tax, putting that tax above 10 cents on the dollar in some parts of King County.

Here's my proposal to help sort things out. Like the levy itself, I am renewing this call every year or so. Although levies pass, these ideas never do. Here are two we'll never see:

61 Consolidate the vote. Keep ballot measures to two elections a year, not three or four, as happens now. Let's have a vote on some things, such as school levies, in February or March, and another vote in November at the general election. And that's all. Currently, the Families and Education Levy vote will take place on Sept. 14 along with a King County Library levy. A billion-dollar education fund vote will go before us Nov. 2. Let's put them on the ballot at the same time, or no more than twice a year. The system works this way now: A September tax vote is tailored for a smaller turnout, and next winter, again off cycle, we'll see more local school levies or a regional transportation-tax vote. We should be able to vote on most tax measures all at once. Don't worry, we can sort them out.

61 Show us the money. I'd like to see voter pamphlets that show the total accumulation of taxes in a single stack. That's difficult because there are so many different governments and levels of taxation. But instead of dealing with $64 a year here, another penny a dollar there, voter information should include the total taxes being collected. Since everything is portrayed as a renewed tax or a target tax, such as the one keeping county parks open, let's see the total number of levies currently being collected. Voters in this region are extraordinarily generous about paying for parks, schools and emergency services. Show us the total taxation stack while asking for renewals or increases.

These are two, simple declarations to voters that the annual request for more taxes is not about strategizing the election process. Or it shouldn't be.

James F. Vesely's e-mail address is: jvesely@seattletimes.com

Friday, July 09, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Mercer Island delays I-90 lane decision

By Natalie Singer
Seattle Times Eastside bureau





</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Mercer Island leaders, citing concern for their commuting constituents, are delaying a delicate regional deal to change the configuration of the Interstate 90 bridge lanes. The City Council was supposed to vote this week on a plan that would do two things: squeeze two new car-pool lanes onto the bridge as soon as funding is available, and begin a long-term effort to turn the reversible center roadway into high-capacity transit lanes (which could use either rail or express buses to move people between Seattle and the Eastside).

Mercer Island is one of five local parties that need to agree on the plan. The change aims to address the problem of reverse commuting on the bridge, which now has two reversible bus/car-pool lanes running to Seattle in the morning and back to the Eastside in the evening. Because there's no diamond lane going westbound during the evening peak period, fewer than half of westbound bus trips are on time.

Seattle, King County and Bellevue have approved the two-step regional solution negotiated last year after years of wrangling. Sound Transit's board will take it up later this month, and it must get final approval from the state Transportation Commission.

Deal seeks to strike balance

The compromise of new lanes now and high-capacity transit later, worked out over months behind closed doors, seeks to strike a balance between freeway-hungry Eastside interests and Seattle, which favors rail.

But four out of seven Mercer Island council members voted Tuesday night to table the city's decision until August, to allow time for a town hall meeting to hear residents' concerns. Over the weekend, a citizen-generated e-mail circulated to hundreds of residents urged them to pressure city leaders to vote against the plan.

In response, the council delayed its decision.

"We wanted to have a discussion with the community," said Councilman Steve Litzow, who said he got 200 e-mails and many phone messages. "People don't understand this, and there's a lot of jumping up and down." All council members agree with the $128 million addition of two new car-pool/transit lanes to the bridge. That option, called R8A, would leave the reversible center lanes as they are for now, and add one new diamond lane in each direction by narrowing other lanes. Solo drivers from Mercer Island would continue to be allowed in the reversible car-pool lanes.

But four of the seven members are concerned that Mercer Islanders, who have special permission to use the reversible lanes into Seattle even if they're driving solo, would lose that perk when the lanes are eventually replaced with rail or express buses.

High-capacity transit in future




"It opens up the door ... for us to lose our access to the lanes," said Sven Goldmanis, a Mercer Island councilman who voted to delay the decision. "It's about time our citizens said, 'What am I going to get for it?' "

But others on the council, including Mayor Alan Merkle, who helped to hammer out the regional compromise, say the agreement would protect islanders' claim to the reversible lanes as long as possible. It will be decades before high-capacity transit could be researched, approved and funded anyway, they say.

Marysville
2 more State Ave. projects part of city's 6-year transportation plan

By Peyton Whitely
Times Snohomish County bureau

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Is there more State Avenue work ahead?

As a matter of fact, there is.

But because it's planned in the northern part of the city, it's not likely to be as disruptive as the construction that's gone on for the past eight months. The new work isn't expected to start until next year.

That and other road projects are contained in the city's six-year transportation-improvement plan. Cities are required to adopt the plans annually in order to receive state and federal transportation funding.

Jeff Massie, an assistant Marysville engineer, said the plans usually have two parts: One part consists of real, or "concrete," plans, he joked.

Road work


Marysville's six-year transportation-improvement plan can be viewed at the city's Public Works Department, 80 Columbia Ave., and at www.ci.marysville.wa.us (click on "Public Works," then on "Engineering").


"Then there are other projects that are a wish list," he said.

The total of the projects comes to more than $105 million, an extraordinary amount considering the entire 2004 city budget is $122 million.

"We're never going to do that amount of work in six years," Massie said. "You have to take these plans with a grain of salt."

Next year's State Avenue work falls under the "real" category and involves two projects.

A $3.8 million project will add a center turn lane on State between 116th and 136th streets northeast, and curbs, gutters and sidewalks on the west side only. That's supposed to be finished next year.

The second project, between 136th and 152nd streets northeast, will widen the road to five lanes, including a center turn lane, and cost of $7.2 million. That's supposed to take until about 2007 to complete.

There are 27 projects on the list. Two other major works:

61 A project costing about $1 million to widen 116th Street Northeast from Interstate 5 to State Avenue. It is to be done next year.

61 About $5.1 million in improvements to the 51st Avenue Northeast corridor between 152nd and 172nd streets northeast. That project is expected to take until about 2008 to complete.

Peyton Whitely: 206-464-2259 or pwhitely@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Tuesday, July 06, 2004 - Page updated at 12:51 A.M.

Streetcar picks up backers

By Bob Young and Mike Lindblom
Seattle Times staff reporters



James Kelly, executive director of the Urban League.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
A proposed South Lake Union streetcar is starting to look like the Love Train, thanks to a public-relations campaign that's roped in support from a Native American group, an African-American group, an Australian-themed restaurant and many more companies and organizations. Armed with a new study that details ridership and cost projections, boosters are gearing up to get the Seattle City Council on board the streetcar project and overcome concerns that the city has more important priorities, such as a $500 million maintenance backlog for streets, sidewalks and bridges.

A study the city released last week says the proposed streetcar from Westlake Center downtown to South Lake Union would have two trains running through the area at any given time, each of them carrying 30 to 35 riders an hour, on average, in the first year. That ridership could double or triple if the neighborhood grows as expected.

The streetcar would cost at least $1.4 million a year to operate, in addition to a $45 million tab for construction, cars and engineering. More than half of the capital cost ― $25 million ― would come from a special tax on property owners near the route, reducing the hit to taxpayers citywide. According to the study, $8.5 million would come from secured state and federal grants and $9 million from pending federal grants, leaving $2.5 million to be determined.

Some skeptics remain unimpressed.

"I'm just struck by how much they are pushing for something this silly. Why is a city with so little money for basic transportation needs, spending on this? I think it shows desperation," said Eugene Wasserman, president of the North Seattle Industrial Association and a member of a city-appointed panel that recently identified the $500 million maintenance backlog.

While touting some of the study's key facts last week, a public-relations firm also was stressing that diverse streetcar supporters include the United Indians of All Tribes Foundation, the Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle and Outback Steakhouse, which recently opened a restaurant near Lake Union's south shore. Dozens of companies with direct financial interests in South Lake Union redevelopment are also part of a lobbying coalition called Build The Streetcar.

The Seattle Times, which owns property in the area, has not taken a position and is still studying the streetcar, according to company spokeswoman Kerry Coughlin.

Jobs touted

Michelle Sanidad, CEO of the United Indians of All Tribes Foundation, said the streetcar would help families get to health and social services in the South Lake Union area. Sanidad said the streetcar also could help bring visitors to a Northwest Native Canoe Center planned for a new South Lake Union Park.

James Kelly, executive director of the Urban League, said his group's backing for a streetcar is similar to its pro-monorail stance. "Anything that creates job opportunities, we're all for that, with unemployment for African Americans in double digits," Kelly said, referring to the percentage of unemployed.

Redevelopment, led by Paul Allen's Vulcan company, is projected to bring up to 20,000 jobs to the South Lake Union area, where Allen owns 60 acres. Vulcan has maintained that a streetcar would spur development and help workers get around the area.

Kelly said he has no assurances that African Americans would get jobs in the biotech hub envisioned for South Lake Union. But, he said, "We're at the table asking for meaningful participation, not just crumbs or handouts."

Kelly said the Urban League, Vulcan and the University of Washington are working on a plan that would identify opportunities for minority contractors and business owners in South Lake Union. He said construction, retail and building maintenance might provide the best job prospects for minorities.

Vote may come soon

As a transportation system, the streetcar would feature less convenience than Sound Transit's new Tacoma streetcar. The Tacoma line, already beating its ridership estimates with 2,300 daily users, benefits from a park-and-ride garage as well as a track corridor mostly separate from automobile lanes. Tacoma trains can stop other traffic at intersections, something not envisioned at South Lake Union.

Seattle streetcar backers say the system would work fine running in road lanes, similar to what is done in Portland and San Francisco.

The $214,000 study, by Parsons Brinckerhoff, Nelson Nygaard Consulting Associates and URS Corp., also said the streetcar would fare well when compared to similar projects in other cities.

Parsons Brinckerhoff ― which is also leading Sound Transit's study of future expansions ― may potentially reap engineering contracts for the streetcar if the plan gets approved. Asked if the firm can be objective, senior project manager Art Borst said: "If we don't do that, we don't stay in business. It would be very obvious if we didn't produce an objective report."

The streetcar campaign is intensifying because the City Council may soon vote on moving the project forward. The Seattle Department of Transportation hopes a key council committee will consider next Tuesday a plan that would take streetcar analysis to a more detailed level, in which operating and financing plans would be drawn up. If the council approves that, a final "go" or "no-go" vote would follow.

In preparing for a council decision, streetcar supporters took journalists on a walking tour of the proposed route last month. They also sent reporters some key findings from the streetcar study before it was released and before council members had even seen it. And tomorrow they will hold a fund-raiser for the streetcar hosted by Mayor Greg Nickels and Council President Jan Drago. The promotional blitz even includes a painted mural on a high-rise building at Sixth and Westlake avenues.

Councilman Nick Licata said the lobbying has barely begun.

"The council is going to be like Troy looking out at a bay full of Greek ships with all the constituents the mayor is going to corral. He wants this trolley badly," Licata said.

Other needs

But streetcar opponents may also buttonhole council members. Fremont developer Suzie Burke said she wouldn't support the streetcar "unless we get every other transportation need taken care of, and I don't think we're even close."

Burke also said she's disturbed by the aggressiveness of the pro-streetcar campaign.

"This is not being done by good-choice methods. This is being done by who can buy the most push," she said.

Given the city's continuing budget constraints, Licata said council members will not want to be seen as favoring South Lake Union over other neighborhoods.

"Council members will look at this and ask, 'Are we putting too many eggs in one basket?' That's where the debate is going to be."

Bob Young: 206-464-2174 or byoung@seattletimes.com; Mike Lindblom: 206-515-5631 or mlindblom@seattletimes.com


Kirkland imposes limitations on scooters

By Nick Perry
Seattle Times Eastside bureau



Mayor Mary-Alyce Burleigh said younger riders are not savvy enough with road rules.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>

Related stories Seattle City Council restricts use of motor scooters


Kirkland last night became the latest Puget Sound-area city to restrict the use of motorized scooters. The City Council voted to ban the scooters from sidewalks and parks, and from streets with speed limits over 25 mph. Scooter drivers must be at least 15 years old, wear a helmet, and use a headlight and rear reflector from a half-hour after sunset until a half-hour before sunrise, the council decided.

Like many cities in the region, Kirkland has been debating how to balance the increasing popularity of motorized scooters against the rising number of complaints from residents concerned about young, reckless drivers and excessive noise.

Renton, Issaquah and Auburn have also voted for scooter restrictions in recent weeks. In May, a 15-year-old boy was seriously injured in Issaquah when his scooter hit a sidewalk dip and he flew into the path of a car.

In Kirkland, the council had planned to vote on scooter restrictions last month but decided first to give more thought to the question of at what age teens could be expected to responsibly handle scooters.

Age continued to be a hot issue last night. The Kirkland Transportation Commission, for a second time, recommended a minimum age of 13, arguing that an older age limit would cut out much of the demographic that uses scooters. Three council members appeared to agree with a lower age limit but were outvoted.

Kirkland Mayor Mary-Alyce Burleigh said younger riders are not savvy enough with road rules. "These are people who I daresay have not read the driver's manual," she said.

Councilman Jim Lauinger argued that a new generation of more sophisticated ― and speedier ― "pocket bikes" makes it more crucial that younger teens are kept off the streets.

Nick Perry: 206-515-5639 or nperry@seattletimes.com


Sunday, June 20, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Bumper to Bumper
Mercer Street to 520 is a challenge

By Charles E. Brown
Seattle Times staff reporter

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Q: How many think driving would be simpler if an overpass ― or underpass ― were built from Mercer Street to Highway 520 so that eastbound motorists wouldn't lane-change their way across four lanes of frequently heavy northbound Interstate 5 traffic in order to reach their exit? Magnolia resident Chris McClain says there ought to be a better approach to the problem.

He would also like to know why northbound I-5 goes from four lanes to only two lanes right in the heart of Seattle, backing traffic to the Corson-Michigan exit just below Beacon Hill.

A: An overpass or underpass may not be imminent. Jamie Holter of the state Department of Transportation says there simply hasn't been enough money or consensus to tackle these now-massive traffic chokepoints and safety issues.

Safety concerns, she says, have put the Alaskan Way Viaduct and the new Highway 520 floating bridge ahead of the Mercer Street mess. Two other key priorities are Interstate 405, where congestion is tremendous, and I-5 in the Seattle metro area, where the pavement is crumbling.

"While we would like to solve all these problems at once, we simply don't have the money."

Got a question?


E-mail it to bumper@seattletimes.com and include your name and city if you agree to publication.


During last year's legislative session, lawmakers allocated money to develop a plan to improve the way I-5 works, Holter says. And that includes the south- and northbound lanes through downtown Seattle as well as the Mercer weave.

"Everything is on the table," Holter said. Planners have started meeting, and "we will be working with business, environmental and neighborhood groups in the next couple years to explore options."

Q: Jim McCurdy, whose office is in downtown Seattle, would like an explanation for why certain cross-streets along Third Avenue have bumps ― in particular Pike and Pine streets ― and some others farther south are also rough.

A: Charles Bookman, in the Seattle Department of Transportation's pavement-management section, says repaving along Third Avenue during construction of Metro's downtown transit tunnel more than a decade ago may be the culprit. The bumps at Pike and Pine were paved before some issues about concrete street panels could be resolved.

There's been discussion about corrective action "and ultimately the decision was made not to remove and replace the concrete," Bookman said.

The department doesn't think speeds on downtown streets are excessive enough for the bumps to affect vehicle operations.

"Correcting the problem would require replacement of a significant area of concrete, and funds are simply not available for work on this scale," he said. "The city has considered a less-costly repair, such as grinding, but determined that it would not improve the situation."

Q: Anne Lawler of Seattle wonders why the westbound turn light at North 145th Street to southbound Aurora Avenue North (Highway 99) is so quick. "It doesn't seem to matter if it's day or night, not many cars get through," she said.

A: Liz Rankin, spokeswoman for Seattle's Department of Transportation, says Aurora carries a high volume of north-south traffic, and therefore is given more time per cycle than east-west traffic on North 145th. Traffic engineers have rechecked the timing, particularly for the westbound left turn, she said.

Engineers think the current timing is about right for that intersection. But, Rankin said, a crew will be returning to check the signal equipment.

Bumper note

New signs are being installed by the state Department of Transportation at four intersections along the Mukilteo Speedway (Highway 525) to warn drivers turning right at red lights to watch for U-turning vehicles.

Legal U-turns are common along Highway 525 now that a concrete barrier separates north- and southbound traffic and limits access to driveways and businesses. The signs, intended to help drivers safely turn onto the highway, will warn them to yield to drivers making U-turns around the medians.

By Friday, signs should be posted at Beverly Park Road, Harbour Pointe Boulevard South, Chennault Beach Road and Harbour Pointe Boulevard North, said Transportation Department assistant project engineer Janice Fahning. The signs read: "Right turn on red, yield to U-turn and through traffic."

Bumper welcomes feedback. E-mail us at bumper@seattletimes.com or call Charles Brown at 206-464-2206.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Guest columnist
Link Kitsap, King counties via Vashon Island

By Randy Boss
Special to The Times



Randy Boss

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>

The people of Gig Harbor have been telling their elected officials and the state Department of Transportation (DOT) for 10 years that their scheme to build a new Tacoma Narrows Bridge with unwanted tolls wouldn't solve our traffic problems. We are now gridlocked eight hours a day and, as bad as it is now, it will only get worse.

Once construction of the second bridge is completed, the state will start collecting a $3 toll to pay for this boondoggle. The tollbooth holding area is so small that waiting traffic will quickly back up onto the main line, blocking onramps to Highway 16, then backing traffic into the adjacent neighborhoods. Voilà ― 24-hour gridlock.

In Gig Harbor, as around the rest of Puget Sound, the answer to our congestion problem is not simply to add capacity to already overcrowded highways and turn those free connectors into toll projects. The answer is to create alternate toll routes and, yes, in some cases, alternate modes of travel.

In our case in Gig Harbor, the real solution to the congestion at the Tacoma Narrows Bridge was not to add another bridge at that same congested location (on an earthquake fault, at that). This only invites more congestion along the entire Highway 16 corridor and even at the merge points on Interstate 5, which state transportation officials acknowledge already has the highest accident rate in all of Washington.

The state's own 1992 study said a new Narrows Bridge would work only if the state, at the same time, doubled the capacity of ferry service across Puget Sound.

We all know that's not going to happen, so it should come as no surprise that when the new bridge opens, with only one new HOV lane in each direction, there is no congestion relief.

The same study recommended another solution ― a new bridge from Kitsap County across Vashon Island and, using new submerged floating tunnel technology, connecting into King County at Highway 518 north of Sea-Tac Airport in Burien.

This new corridor would eliminate several ferry routes across central Puget Sound and provide 24/7 access between King County and the west side of Puget Sound. It would be funded using a $7 toll, which is significantly less than the $15 to $20 ferry fare for a car and driver. The 35-mile trip from Southcenter to Kitsap County would be cut to 10 miles and 10 minutes instead of the current one hour by car or by ferry.

Elimination of some of these ferry routes would save you and me over $2 billion in state taxes necessary to support the operation of those routes over the next 10 years ― not including an additional $2 billion in new capital investments.

Implementing this rational "alternative route" proposal would cost the state no money, because it would be built by private contractors who would bond the project themselves and get paid back with the $7 tolls. It would free up over $4 billion in state highway funds that could be spent on new road projects instead of being sunk into a failing ferry system.

The Department of Transportation tracked license plates across the Tacoma Narrows Bridge and concluded that this fixed crossing at Vashon would have taken 30 percent of the traffic off the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, bringing the level of service below the congestion threshold. You see, we really never needed a new bridge; we only needed an alternate route.

But the DOT, in its wisdom, decided we would get this new Tacoma Narrows span that doesn't solve congestion. To add insult to injury, the users who live on the "other side," in the Gig Harbor-Port Orchard area, will have to pay for nearly 100 percent of this $850 million project ― that's before the inevitable cost overruns ― even though over 80 percent of those users voted against this project.

A few years ago, the Cross Sound Transportation Coalition was formed, and we have continued to promote the construction of a fixed link across Puget Sound as the real solution to the traffic congestion on the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, Highway 16, and out to Interstate 5.

We concluded that the Department of Transportation's "fix" was no fix at all and the only way to solve the problem now is to divert traffic away from this bottleneck through alternative links.

Over the past year, I've met with business, civic and government groups throughout King, Pierce, Kitsap, Thurston and Grays Harbor counties ― including Vashon Island. Of the hundreds of people I've talked to, the overwhelming response has been, "So, what's the holdup? This is a great idea. Let's get going!" Even on Vashon Island.

Toll projects will work in Washington if the DOT would allow private construction of new infrastructure and stop trying to get people to pay tolls for improvements to roads they already paid for with previous tolls and taxes.

Give us an alternative route and we'll pay tolls for faster, less-congested roads; and when we use the new toll facility, it will reduce traffic on the other congested roads in Washington. What the DOT is doing now isn't working. Let's try something new and get Washington moving again.

Randy Boss, of Gig Harbor, is a commercial real estate broker and member of the Cross Sound Transportation Coalition. He can be reached at randyboss@centurytel.net or (253) 858-5100.




Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

 Here and Now
Cross over the bridge




</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
After nearly a year of construction, the $2.5-million Galer Street pedestrian overpass over Aurora Avenue North is set to open for public use. The state Department of Transportation project's formal opening ceremony will be at 10 a.m. tomorrow at the west entrance to the pedestrian bridge at Sixth Avenue North and Galer Street. Queen Anne youngsters have been tapped to leave footprints on the overpass after dipping their feet in buckets of "environmentally friendly" paint.

Transportation department officials said the bridge is intended to provide safe, easy access across Aurora Avenue (Highway 99) for pedestrians, bicycle riders and wheelchair users. The overpass, which links Queen Anne Hill with the Lake Union community, completes a network of trails and walkways that stretches from Lake Union west to Puget Sound.

A Department of Transportation spokeswoman said the overpass is the only way for pedestrians to legally cross Highway 99 between Mercer Street and the Aurora Bridge.

Libraries come and go

The Seattle Public Library's Northgate temporary-service site at 10548 Fifth Ave. N.E. closes for good at 6 p.m. today, so the site can be cleared to make way for construction of a new Northgate branch at that location.

The library is partnering with the Seattle Parks Department for a complex that includes the library, a community center and park. Construction will begin in late summer.

Meanwhile, an expanded North East Branch at 6801 35th Ave. N.E. will reopen at noon tomorrow.

This weekend

The nonprofit Asian Counseling and Referral Service's 14th annual Walk for Rice, a benefit for the agency's food bank, will be at Seward Park tomorrow, 8 a.m. to noon.

Proceeds from the walkathon and fun race will be used to buy rice and other Asian/Pacific staples to be distributed to thousands of local low-income households.




Youngsters under 8 can participate in a tot-trot just before the event for walkers and runners. Information is online at www.walkforrice.com, or call 206-695-7551.

Getting around

Motorists traveling across the Tacoma Narrows Bridge are likely to notice a large yellow tower crane immediately south of the bridge. The crane is the public's first view of what will be months of construction on two towers for a new Narrows Bridge. Crews will start working on the Gig Harbor tower first, then the Tacoma tower.

Traffic watch

Seattle: Several lanes of southbound Interstate 5 and freeway exits and onramps in downtown Seattle will be closed from tomorrow at midnight until Sunday morning and also late Sunday to Monday morning for freeway renovation projects.

The freeway southbound will be reduced to two lanes from Mercer Street to just south of the Interstate 90 interchange. To be closed are the Union Street, Columbia/James, Dearborn, Fourth Avenue South and Airport Way South offramps; the Spring and James Street/Sixth Avenue onramps, and the I-5 ramp to I-90.

On Sunday, I-5 will be reduced to two lanes from Mercer Street to the Columbia/James exit from 11 p.m. to 4:30 a.m. Monday. During that time, the Howell/Yale onramp and the Union and Columbia/James offramps will be closed.

Several ramps, including Mercer Street ramps, will be open.

State Department of Transportation officials said the overnight closures should not affect Mariners traffic tomorrow night or traffic tied to this weekend's Gay Pride festivities on Capitol Hill. But late-night and early-morning access from southbound I-5 and Capitol Hill will be limited.

Here & Now is compiled by Seattle Times staff reporter Charles E. Brown and news assistant Suesan Whitney Henderson. To submit an item, e-mail herenow@seattletimes.com or call 206-464-2226.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company
Union protest of foot ferry refused

By Susan Gilmore
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
The state Utilities and Transportation Commission has denied a protest filed by the Inlandboatmen's Union (IBU) over proposed passenger-ferry service between Seattle and Bremerton. The IBU filed the protest over the Utilities and Transportation Commission's (UTC) temporary permit to Kitsap Ferry to begin the foot-ferry service. The union has until July 14 to protest a permanent permit.

The union, in filing its protest, said the need for the proposed ferry service was not immediate and that it would hurt the state ferry system.

"The commission finds and concludes that there is an urgent and immediate need for passenger-only ferry service between Bremerton and Seattle and that granting a temporary certificate authorizing Kitsap Ferry to provide such service is in the public interest," the three-member panel said in denying the IBU protest.

The temporary permit allows Kitsap Ferry to begin foot-ferry service while its permanent application is pending.

The IBU also protested an application by another company, Aqua Express, which hopes to provide passenger service between Kingston and Seattle. The UTC agreed to let the IBU intervene in that permit on three points: whether the ferry service is financially viable, whether a need exists for the service and how it would affect the state ferries.

The state dropped its passenger-only service for all routes except those serving Vashon Island because they weren't financially viable.

The UTC will hold a hearing in Kingston tomorrow on the Aqua Express application.Susan Gilmore: 206-464-2054 or sgilmore@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Stephen Dunphy / Times staff columnist
Taking stock of the economy






</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
The Northwest economy has been performing well over the past six months, if a stock index is any gauge. The Davidson 99 Regional Stock Index, comprised of 99 stocks from companies in the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountain regions, has gained 7 percent over the first half of 2004, outperforming the Dow Jones Industrial Average, Nasdaq Composite and S&P 500. Two Washington-based companies were included among the top five performers: InfoSpace was up 65 percent and Western Wireless gained 57.5 percent.

The index, compiled by regional brokerage D.A. Davidson & Co., outperformed the S&P 500's 2.6 percent increase, while the Nasdaq reported a gain of 2.2 percent and the Dow lost 0.18 percent for the January through June period.

Just average performance

Seattle-Tacoma International Airport is average for on-time arrivals and departures among the 30 large airports tracked by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. For the year through May, Seattle ranked 21st for arrivals and 19th for departures.

Flights arrived on time at Seattle 79.4 percent of the time. That compares with 84.8 percent on time arrivals at the top airport, Charlotte, N.C., and 63 percent at the worst, Chicago. Flights departed on time 83.3 percent of the time in Seattle compared with 88.7 percent at Houston and 68 percent in Chicago.

For May only, Seattle was ranked 16th in arrivals with a 79.3 on time percentage and 17th in on time departures with 83.2 percent of flights leaving on time.

Factory jobs are key

Much has been made of the long decline in manufacturing jobs, and the small increases reported in recent months have been greeted with cheers. What's so special about manufacturing jobs?

Factory jobs pay well, higher than average. That makes them "primary jobs," able to produce employment in other sectors.

In 2002, average manufacturing employees earned $45,000 a year in wages, while their average total compensation (salary plus benefits, bonuses and Social Security contributions) was $56,000. Average U.S. employees in the remainder of the economy earned nearly $40,000 a year, with total compensation of more than $47,000.




While some other occupations have higher salaries, manufacturing offers higher pay than the construction, services and retail trade sectors, according to the National Association of Manufacturers.

Goodbye canceled checks

Interesting piece in Consumer Reports in the August issue on a banking change that will affect almost everyone. Beginning late October, canceled checks could disappear when new federal banking legislation takes effect.

The Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act allows banks to use electronic check processing rather than the current paper system. The idea is for banks to generate a "substitute check," a special paper copy that the bank guarantees is an accurate and legible copy of the original. Consumer Reports says the law does not explicitly require banks to provide substitute checks.

The consumer group and others have petitioned the Federal Reserve to clarify consumer rights when it issues rules this summer on the new law.

The American Banker, a trade publication, said several tests of electronic systems are under way. Bank One and KeyCorp have been transmitting check image files to each other for several weeks in a small-scale test, the publication said.

And finally...

Here's a statistic I've seen in several publications recently: Of about 750 major league baseball players, only 42 have college degrees. Jamie Moyer (Indiana) and Shigetoshi Hasegawa (Ritsumeikan, Japan) are the two Mariners with degrees. Hasagawa gets our nod ― he has a degree in business.

Stephen H. Dunphy's columns appear Tuesdays-Fridays and Sundays. Phone: 206-464-2365. Fax: 206-382-8879. E-mail: sdunphy@seattletimes.com.


Nickels' plan for Lake Union area questioned

By Bob Young
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
A new Seattle City Council report casts doubts on Mayor Greg Nickels' plan to spend millions on transportation and other public improvements in the South Lake Union neighborhood to help create jobs. The report says Nickels has not made a "compelling argument" that his proposals, which could cost taxpayers roughly $500 million, are necessary to spur redevelopment of the area as a biotech hub. South Lake Union is already seeing growth without such spending, the study notes, implying that massive development could occur without public projects pushed by Nickels.

It also looks skeptically at biotech as a "large and stable source of new jobs." No biotech firm is among the 25 largest employers in Boston or San Francisco, the two leading biotech cities in the country, according to the report.

Council members say the report arrives at a key time in their consideration of the mayor's South Lake Union strategy. In the next two months, some council members hope to decide the fate of the mayor's proposed streetcar and Mercer Street improvements, which appear to be the two most controversial projects in Nickels' package.

"I think the council will give serious weight to this analysis," said Councilman Tom Rasmussen. The 14-page report was written by Peter Harris, a legislative analyst with 20 years' experience in city government. As a council "central staff" member, Harris is supposed to provide neutral analysis, independent of any political agenda, similar to the work done by the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service in Washington, D.C.

His complex report should help the council sort through intense lobbying and competing claims in the South Lake Union debate. On one side are allies of Paul Allen's development company, Vulcan, which owns 60 acres in the area, and is leading the makeover of the South Lake Union area as a biotech center. On the other side are critics who say the city is focusing on "Allentown" at the expense of other city needs.

"Clearly we've got two emotional pitches," said Councilman Richard Conlin. "One says biotech is the best thing since sliced bread and the other says it (the mayor's strategy) is all for the benefit of Paul Allen. We need to get away from the emotional polarization and make rational decisions."

While the report said there's no evidence a new streetcar or reconfigured Mercer Street would attract biotech firms, it noted that such companies may be drawn to Seattle by its overall quality of life. In that regard, public investments in lively, pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods might "indirectly" encourage the biotech industry to grow in the Emerald City, the report said.

Proponents of the mayor's strategy said the report actually supports their goals, despite its seemingly negative tone. They stressed that the mayor's proposals are aimed at creating a more appealing urban environment in the South Lake Union neighborhood. And, they said when the council looks closer at projects such as the streetcar they will conclude that each one will help lure and retain employers ― even if Harris didn't see direct evidence of such a link.

"Whatever criteria council uses, we are confident they are going to conclude, as the mayor has, that these investments are important and necessary to creating jobs in South Lake Union," said Michael Mann, deputy director of the city's strategic planning office.

Bob Young: 206-464-2174 or byoung@seattletimes.com


Road construction report
Areas slow going and no going








</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Marysville area

1 132nd Street Northeast: One lane will be closed between 54th Drive Northeast and 56th Avenue Northeast from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. weekdays through Aug. 10.

2 108th Street Northeast: One lane will be closed between 52nd and 54th drives northeast from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. weekdays through next Wednesday.

Granite Falls area

3 Ray Gray Road will be closed between Crooked Mile Road and 184th Avenue Northeast through July 30 for drainage repairs.

Snohomish area

4 103rd Avenue Southeast: One lane will be shut between Bunk Foss Road and 32nd Street Southeast from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays through Aug. 13 for the replacement of power poles.

5 Foster Slough Road will be closed in the 7300 block through July 30 for emergency repairs. Detours have been posted.

6 Rivershore Road: One lane will be shut south of Swan Slough Road weekdays through July 23 for bank-stabilization repairs.

Lynnwood area




7 South Lake Stickney Drive and 20th

Place West: One lane will be closed from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. weekdays through July 21.

8 212th Street Southwest: One lane will be closed between 40th and 44th avenues west from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. weekdays through July 28.

Bothell-Mill Creek area

9 Logan Road: One lane will be shut at Elberta Road and on Elberta between Logan and 208th Place Southwest from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. weekdays through July 15.

10 13th Drive Southeast: One lane will be closed south of 196th Street Southeast to the end of the road from 7 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. weekdays through July 16.

11 Bothell-Everett Highway: Two lanes will be shut between 164th and 132nd streets southeast from 5 a.m. to 8 p.m. weekdays through July 16 for repaving. One lane in each direction will remain open.

12 Lane closures will occur on 37th Avenue Southeast between 212th Street Southeast and 210th Place Southeast, on 212th Street Southeast between 42nd and 35th avenues southeast, and on 39th Avenue Southeast between 212th Street Southeast and Maltby Road from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays through July 30.

13 180th Street Southeast: A lane will be shut between Sunset Road and 51st Avenue Southeast from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays through Oct. 29. In addition, a lane of 43rd Avenue Southeast will be closed at Highway 524 and 204th, 200th and 196th streets southeast from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. weekdays through Oct. 29. A water main is being installed.

Maltby

14 Lane closures are planned on Echo Lake Road just south of 204th Street Southeast, on 204th between Echo Lake Road and 113th Drive Southeast, and on Downes Road between 112th and 110th drives southeast from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays through Aug. 16.

Compiled by Seattle Times Snohomish County bureau news assistant Laurie Parker.



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Friday, June 11, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Wide support for acquiring rail corridor

By NATALIE SINGER
Seattle Times Eastside bureau

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

A regional planning committee recommended yesterday that $660,000 in federal funding be spent on exploring public acquisition of a 40-mile Eastside rail corridor. The move is likely to lead to a study on the cost and possible new uses for the lightly used Burlington Northern Santa Fe corridor, which now carries the Spirit of Washington dinner train from Renton to Woodinville.

One scenario is that the corridor would be obtained through a process called "railbanking," which allows railroads to sell, lease or donate the rights of way on routes they no longer operate to private organizations or local governments for use as trails. The tool guarantees that the trail can later be reactivated as a transportation corridor.

Besides the dinner train, the line is currently used just twice a day, five days a week by a single freight train carrying primarily forest products. It runs mostly parallel to Interstate 405, winding through the heart of Renton, up the eastern shore of Lake Washington, through Bellevue and Kirkland, past the wineries of Woodinville, along Highway 522 into rural Snohomish County and on to the city of Snohomish.

Burlington Northern approached the state Department of Transportation last fall to gauge its interest in buying the corridor, and the state asked the Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC), which oversees growth and transportation planning, to serve as a forum for the discussion.

A PSRC committee spent six months taking the pulse of cities along the line, and yesterday representatives told regional planners there was a clear interest in preserving the corridor by bringing it into public ownership. The railroad has indicated that if there's no public interest, the right of way ― which stretches at least 100 feet wide along the line ― could be sold piecemeal to private buyers.

"It's virtually unanimous along the corridor," said King Cushman, PSRC's regional strategy adviser, of the desire to preserve the route. The process of applying for the $660,000 in federal funds has already begun, and the PSRC's executive board will have to give its approval at a June 24 meeting in order for the study to move forward. The money would amount to less than half of 1 percent of a pot of federal money earmarked for regional transportation projects and disbursed by PSRC.

While most representatives at the PSRC's transportation and growth boards agreed yesterday to look into acquiring the corridor, members from Snohomish and Pierce counties ― whose districts would be sharing the cost of the study but contain little or none of the length of the route ― vociferously disagreed.

"We have a big plate of stuff we have to work on right now," said Snohomish County Councilman Jeff Sax. "These dollars could be applied somewhere else."

The naysayers were chided by peers who said it would be a tragedy to lose a 40-mile swath of up-for-grabs property so close to job and residential centers.

"This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity," said Kent City Councilman Tim Clark. "I'm sorry, but ... when you get an opportunity like this, you don't let it go."




There is no consensus on what should be done with the property if it's purchased. While many of the jurisdictions along the line have expressed interest in a bicycle and pedestrian trail, the options for future transportation use are more controversial.

Representatives of some cities, including Renton, expressed concern with the possibility of high-capacity transit running on the route in the future. Others, including Kirkland, said they could envision a shared use with both rail service and trails.

Natalie Singer: 206-464-2704 or nsinger@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Guest columnist
Distracting tunnel vision

By Doug MacDonald
Special to The Times



Doug MacDonald

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
We're happy to see Gig Harbor resident Randy Boss acknowledge that tolls are an effective and fair way to fund transportation improvements in Washington state. ("Link Kitsap, King counties via Vashon Island" Times guest commentary, June 24.)

We wish, though, he could see that his current idea ― a new bridge from Kitsap County to Vashon Island leading to a new underwater floating tunnel crossing Puget Sound and coming up in Burien ― is not what we should be collecting tolls to build, at least not anytime soon.

If an underwater tunnel is an idea whose time has come ― and we're not sure it is ― the main flaw in this vision is what this project would do on and under land, not underwater.

Acres of farm and residential land would have to be taken near Southworth and on Vashon. In Burien, where the tunnel would emerge, over 250 homes and businesses would have to be taken. New roads in Kitsap and Burien would be built to connect traffic back to Highways 16 or 518 so travelers could get where they are going.

What about the feasibility of traffic tunnels that float under the water's surface? Experts tell us that the idea has been around for years. But most say that it will be five or 10 more years before anybody actually tries to build one.

Instead, we should dedicate our time, energy and money on regional transportation projects that must be constructed now, years before an underwater cross-Sound floating tunnel will go on the to-do list. Then, perhaps we can get some good cost estimates (we don't know where Boss gets the idea that this project could be financed by a $7 toll), learn whether 30,000 people a day really would be prepared to use such a project (that's a third of the daily traffic on the Alaskan Way Viaduct) and whether true community support could be found for accepting the impacts of such a project, both on the land and in the environmentally sensitive waters of Puget Sound.

Meanwhile, work is going well on the new Tacoma Narrows Bridge, heading for an on-time, on-budget completion in 2007. With a $3 toll and more capacity, separated traffic on the bridge, and improved ramps, approaches and shoulders, quite a lot of Kitsap County will see much better transportation performance.

Improvements to Highway 16 from the bridge to Interstate 5 will also help. Pierce Transit is already planning to increase bus service for the day the bridge opens and is looking for a site to build a new 500- to 750-car park-and-ride lot to make it easy for people to catch the bus. Boss has promised huge cost overruns. So far, we've disappointed him completely with our project-delivery strategies, and we're proud of it.

We're heading in the right direction, and we're doing first things first. Who's to say that someday a floating submerged traffic tunnel won't be a good idea. But we can say that that day isn't now.

Doug MacDonald is the secretary of the Washington State Department of Transportation.

Bumper to Bumper
Traffic choked up near Newcastle; growing pains for Mukilteo Speedway

By Charles E. Brown
Seattle Times staff reporter

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Q: Nicholas Blenkush, who lives in Renton's Kennydale community and not far from Interstate 405, says he's noticed that during his morning commute into Bellevue, northbound traffic more often than not is choked at Exit 9, the Newcastle onramp. Other onramps to 405 have ramp meters to regulate vehicles merging into traffic, but the Newcastle ramp does not.

Blenkush said cars are often backed up onto the onramp, which apparently causes the traffic snarl. Past that spot, he said, traffic flow seems to pick up again. So why, he asks, isn't there a ramp meter controlling traffic on that ramp?

"It seems this would ease the congestion down the line, and make life good for everybody," Blenkush said.

A: Kevin Mizuta, a state Department of Transportation engineer, says ramp meters at that location would probably ease congestion at that spot, and could ease congestion on arterials that feed that ramp.

The state installed ramp meters at nearly every onramp along 405 more than five years ago. But at the time, low traffic volumes indicated no need for metering at the Newcastle ramp, he said.

Over the years, the population distribution has changed, so now the state plans to add ramp meters there.

Got a question?


E-mail it to bumper@seattletimes.com and include your name and city if you agree to publication.


"But we can't install meters as soon as we'd like," Mizuta said. The onramp isn't long enough, he noted.

A long merge lane is needed to give vehicles time to safely get up to freeway speed.

"We also need a long merge lane so cars waiting to get to the ramp meter do not block arterial traffic," he said.

The state figures that to lengthen the merge lane, the ramp will have to be rebuilt and lengthened. That work, Mizuta said, is not scheduled to be done until funding comes available after July of next year.

Q: Don Wollam of Shoreline wonders what's going on with the Mukilteo Speedway in Snohomish County.

A few years ago, he notes, a turn lane was added to make it a three-lane road. Now, the road is being widened again to turn it into a five-lane road, which still includes a center turn lane. So why wasn't that done in the first place?

A: Richard Mitchell, a state Department of Transportation engineering manager for that area of Snohomish County, says the work was done in different phases to prevent a total closure of the road during construction, which would have had a major impact on traffic and area businesses.

"If we had done all the work at once, we would have had to shut down the road entirely for many months," he said.

Because the work was scheduled in two phases, he pointed out, one or two lanes could be closed instead of all lanes.

Also, he said, in some areas the state raised the road, and in other areas, the road was lowered.

Turn lanes and curbs were added, and now it's down to the final paving. All this took nearly two years. "It's almost like an onion, which has many layers," Mitchell said. "You peel layers away to get to the center. Road construction is like that, only in reverse.

"We build layer onto layer until we get the final product so that we can keep traffic moving and businesses open."

The new five-lane section of the Mukilteo Speedway, which is Highway 525, should be finished by the end of summer.


Bumper notes

I-90 tree removal: Motorists traveling in recent days on Interstate 90 between Bellevue and Issaquah may wonder why crews are removing trees in the median.

The state Department of Transportation says the tree removal is part of a project to stabilize the hillside in the median between the Lake Sammamish Parkway exit (Exit 13) and the Highway 900 exit (Exit 15).

The department says shifting in the hillside damaged the freeway's drainage system, causing the roadway to erode and sink in several places.

The old drainage system is being replaced with new horizontal drainpipes, and work is being done to help prevent further damage.

More than 20 trees were to be removed before excavating the hillside to install the new drainage system. But the trees are to be replaced by native evergreens and shrubs in November, along with a rock buttress to stabilize the slope.

Californians, here they come: Between May 2003 and last month, the number of California drivers moving to Washington state grew nearly 20 percent. The year ending last month saw 27,238 new drivers from California ― by far the largest population of out-of-staters to move into Washington. (Next in line was new arrivals from Oregon.)

New numbers from the state Department of Licensing found that in the past year 121,200 drivers have moved into the state and 70,844 have moved out, for a net gain of 50,000.

Bumper welcomes feedback on topics appearing in this column. E-mail us at bumper@seattletimes.com or call Charles Brown at 206-464-2206.


On the Road
Is it legal to pick flowers along roads?

By KATHERINE SATHER
Seattle Times Eastside bureau

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Q: Am I allowed to pick flowers by the side of the public roadway? Does it depend what city I'm in? I'm not talking about anyone's private property, just the right of way alongside city or county roads. A: Picking wildflowers by the side of county roads is discouraged, and on state highways it's illegal. Police will issue warnings and citations to motorists who stop on the shoulder of the highway to hunt for flowers, said Melanie Coon, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Transportation. The motorists put themselves in danger and obstruct traffic.

This was an issue for the transportation department in the spring of 1998, when white, pink and purple poppies bloomed in thick bunches by Interstate 405 between Kirkland and Woodinville, she said. State workers plant a seed mix of clover, grass and wildflowers such as California poppies and corn poppies after construction projects to prevent erosion. The 1998 phenomenon was caused after a road-widening project, when there was a mix-up with the seed mix and poppies grew in large numbers. During most years, Coon said it's unusual for motorists to stop and pick flowers, but the 1998 blooms drew many off the road.

On county roads, trees, shrubs and flowers are planted to stabilize the soil and enhance the natural beauty of the area, said Linda Thielke, a spokeswoman for the King County Department of Transportation. Her organization discourages motorists from picking them.

Q: On May 27, we had a record-breaking rainfall after several days of rain. So imagine my surprise when I was driving east on Interstate 90 at 8:45 p.m., and just before the Mercer Island lid I saw the sprinkler system on, watering the plants in the median. Why are our tax dollars and our water supply being wasted with any sprinkler system going during the always-soggy month of May?

A: During May, the state tests its irrigation system to ensure it's working properly, said Mike Katzer, maintenance supervisor for the Department of Transportation. Crews activate bits and pieces of the system to check for problems and make repairs before the routine watering starts in mid-July. The irrigation systems are not activated for long during this troubleshooting period, Katzer said, and the state aims to conserve as much water as possible.

Later in the summer, most of the watering takes place at night or early in the morning, when water has the best chance of soaking into the soil. The Department of Transportation only waters vegetation adjacent to the roadway. The irrigation system on I-90, between I-5 and I-405, is activated with a modem and timers in a nearby maintenance facility, Katzer said. As vegetation along the highway matures, it becomes more self-sufficient and the state disconnects the irrigation system.


Got a question?

Send it to The Seattle Times Eastside News Bureau, 1200 112th Ave. N.E., Suite C-145, Bellevue, WA 98004. Fax: 425-453-0449. E-mail: east@seattletimes.com




Early warning

Mercer Island ― Up to two lanes of the Interstate 90 bridge between the Mercer Island Lid and Mount Baker Tunnel will be closed tomorrow and Sunday from 4 a.m. to noon. Crews will be replacing worn and damaged lane markers.

Bellevue ― The southbound Bellevue Way onramp to interstates 90 and 405 will be closed nightly from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m. Wednesday and Thursday. Detour routes will be provided for all ramp closures.

Issaquah ― The right lane of southbound Highway 900 south of Gilman Boulevard will close from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. tomorrow and 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. Monday through Friday. The northbound right lane also will be closed 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday through Friday. At the same time, the right lane of the northbound Highway 900 onramp to westbound Interstate 90 will be closed.

Katherine Sather 206-464-2752 or ksather@seattletimes.com


Got a question? Send it to The Seattle Times Eastside News Bureau, 1200 112th Ave. N.E., Suite C-145, Bellevue, WA 98004. Fax: 425-453-0449. E-mail: east@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Bumper to Bumper
Weigh-stations mystery solved

By Charles E. Brown
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Q: Washington, like other states, has "weigh stations" scattered along freeways. Arun Nisargand of Bellevue, who moved to the Northwest from India more than two decades ago, says he still hasn't figured out what weigh stations do. More often than not, he pointed out, they appear closed. "Only about 10 percent of the stations I have seen seem to be open."

In India, there are no such stations along highways. But commercial drivers entering a city are supposed to stop at a municipal office near the city limits to declare their load and pay taxes on it. Presuming that weigh stations are used to collect taxes here, Nisargand wonders how they do that when most are closed.

What is the function of weigh stations?

A: Weigh stations in this state are not there to collect taxes. But Sgt. Michael Rupert of the State Patrol's Commercial Vehicle Division says the stations are used to monitor commercial-vehicle traffic along state highways and interstates and to nab commercial drivers who may be out of compliance with laws governing commercial loads.

Most motorists can ignore weigh stations. But commercial vehicles of more than 16,000 pounds gross-vehicle-weight are supposed to stop so staff can conduct driver and vehicle inspections to enforce size, weight and load laws.

Hours for weigh stations vary according to staffing and location, Rupert says, with a few, such as in Spokane and Vancouver, Clark County, open 24 hours.

Of the 52 weigh stations in this state, four are in King County ― one just east of Issaquah along Interstate 90 westbound; one in each direction of I-5 in the Federal Way area, and one along Highway 99 in Federal Way.

Q: For at least two decades, Gregg Teslovich of Seattle says he's wondered why a pedestrian overpass from University of Washington athletic facilities to upper campus over Montlake Boulevard has been allowed with a clearance of just 14-plus feet.

During that time, he said, he's seen about six crumpled trucks wedged into the walkway. "It's been so frequent that they had to install a steel plate where the concrete has been smashed away," he said. "Since I don't live under that walkway and only pass by infrequently, there must have been many more such smashing encounters."

A: Seattle Department of Transportation spokeswoman Liz Rankin says the bridge was built in 1938, and that the unusually low clearance is a result of the bridge's arch shape.




Rankin says that the bridge has an early-warning sign and a sign on it noting the low clearance and that while signs do work for most overheight vehicles, the bridge does get hit. Bridge concrete has chipped off but has not significantly reduced the span's strength.

Rankin said the city has studied ways to decrease accidents. Lowering the roadway or raising the bridge are two expensive options, she says, adding that the city is working with the university to come up with a long-term solution for pedestrian access to Husky sports facilities.

Bumper update

Now that the newly constructed Galer Street pedestrian overpass over Aurora Avenue North (Highway 99) is open, several readers have asked how, if at all, usage of that $2.5 million bridge will be monitored to see if it turns out to be worth the cost.

A: While bicyclists and pedestrians can now use the bridge ― it was formally dedicated eight days ago ― it is not yet open to wheelchair users. Jamie Holter of the state Department of Transportation says tests on the overpass' stair-lift system and automatic 911 dialer on the stair lift need to be completed before the bridge can be opened to wheelchair users.

The new bridge is supposed to provide a safe place for people to cross over busy Aurora between the Queen Anne and Westlake neighborhoods.

"Anecdotal evidence indicates that hundreds of pedestrians and cyclists are already making this new bridge part of their routine," Holter says.

"Since this bridge was built primarily to enhance safety, we plan to continue to closely monitor the number of accidents in this area but have no plans to count how many people use the bridge, as this was not the primary reason we built the overpass."

Have a traffic-related question or comment? E-mail bumper@seattletimes.com or call Charles E. Brown at 206-464-2206. Please include your name and city if you agree to publication.



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Wednesday, June 23, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Granite Falls
Meeting next week to look at bypass for Granite Falls

By Times Snohomish County Bureau


 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Progress on a proposed 2.1-mile truck bypass will be discussed from 7 to 9 p.m. next Wednesday at the Granite Falls Community Center, 101 E. Pioneer St.

Officials from Granite Falls, Snohomish County, the state Department of Transportation and the Federal Highway Administration will present design recommendations and provide updates on funding, environmental processes and other aspects of the proposed project.

The session will include computer-generated traffic simulations prepared by consultants. The public will have an opportunity to ask questions.

The bypass, north of downtown, would divert commercial truck traffic away from the city center and connect Highway 92 to the Mountain Loop Highway. Construction could begin by 2007, depending on environmental approval and funding.

The bypass would ease congestion downtown, where more than 1,000 trucks a day commonly pass through on their way to and from nearby gravel quarries.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Eastside Digest
520 bridge project focus of open house




 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Residents can learn more about the Highway 520 bridge-replacement project at an open house from 5 to 8 p.m. tomorrow at St. Luke's Lutheran Church, 3030 Bellevue Way N.E. The state Department of Transportation and Sound Transit will provide updates on the four-lane, six-lane and eight-lane alternatives, neighborhood lids, traffic analyses, future funding and tolls.

The agencies are analyzing the environmental effects of the four- and six-lane alternatives, and the draft environmental report expected to be published next summer. For information, visit www.wsdot.wa.gov/projects/SR520Bridge.

Snoqualmie Groundbreaking for elementary school

A groundbreaking for the Snoqualmie Valley School District's newest elementary school will take place this morning.

The school, expected to open in September 2005, does not yet have a name. The money for construction will come from a $53.5 million bond measure passed by district voters in May. The bond will finance building the elementary school and a middle school in North Bend.

The ceremony will begin at 10 a.m. at 34816 S.E. Ridge St. in Snoqualmie.

Bellevue Meetings will discuss parkway alternatives

Residents are invited to learn about potential changes to West Lake Sammamish Parkway at three open houses.

After nearly a year of community meetings and work, five alternatives are up for consideration, including: two variations of a multiuse trail separated from the road by a planted buffer; bike lanes on both sides of the road; improvements on the parkway including a 2- to 3-foot shoulder on the east side; or maintaining street conditions by overlaying the existing pavement.

The first meeting will be from 6 to 8 p.m. tomorrow at Camp Sambica Country Kitchen, 4114 West Lake Sammamish Parkway S.E. The second will be from 5 to 7 p.m. Tuesday at St. Peter's United Methodist Fellowship Hall, 17222 N.E. Eighth St.; and the third will be from 6 to 8 p.m. next Wednesday at Tam O'Shanter Club House, 1313 183rd Ave. N.E.




Mercer Island State Sen. Horn will run for third term

State Sen. Jim Horn, R-Mercer Island, announced yesterday that he will run for a third term to represent the 41st Legislative District.

Horn was previously elected to four terms in the House of Representatives, where he served as speaker pro tem. He currently is chairman of the Senate Highways and Transportation Committee. He is a 35-year resident of Mercer Island.

Seattle Times Eastside bureau


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Initiative campaigns aiming for deadline

By Andrew Garber
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
OLYMPIA ― At least a half-dozen initiative campaigns plan to turn in signatures by Friday's deadline to qualify measures for the November ballot. Tim Eyman went first, turning in what he said were more than 238,000 signatures Monday in hopes of qualifying Initiative 892 for the ballot. The measure, funded by the gaming industry, would make electronic slot machines more widely available and use the taxes on the new gambling profits to lower state property taxes.

Other campaigns hope to follow, but not everyone is confident of getting the signatures they need in time.

"If everything goes right, we'll make it. If something goes wrong in the next 48 hours, we won't," said Scott Peterson, a spokesman for the Initiative 890 smoking ban. "It's going to be tight."

Organizers must collect 197,734 valid signatures. They generally turn in tens of thousands of additional signatures in case some are illegible or invalid.

Here's the status of several initiatives:

61 I-890: Sponsored by a coalition of consumer and health-care groups, it would ban smoking in all public places. Its political-action committee (PAC) is Breathe Easy Washington. The campaign has made an appointment to turn in signatures to the Secretary of State's Office on Friday.

61 Initiative 891: The measure would prohibit smoking in any public place allowing minors. Its PAC is Vote Yes Initiative 891. The campaign has made an appointment to submit signatures Friday.

61 Initiative 864: A Tim Eyman measure, it would cut some local property taxes by 25 percent. Its PAC is Voters Want More Choices. Eyman sent out a notice yesterday saying he plans to turn in signatures Friday.

61 Initiative 872: The Washington State Grange initiative calls for a Louisiana-style primary-election system also known as the "Top Two." The system would let voters cast ballots for any candidate, regardless of party, with the top two finishers advancing to the general election. Its PAC is Citizens Preserving Voter Choice. The Grange says it turned in about 230,000 signatures yesterday.

61 Initiative 884: The League of Education Voters initiative would increase the state sales tax by a penny on the dollar to raise $1 billion a year for education programs from preschool to college. Its PAC is Citizens for the Education Trust Fund. A League spokesperson said the group hopes to turn in about 260,000 signatures Friday.




61 I-892: Another Eyman initiative calls for allowing electronic slot machines outside of tribal casinos, and using the tax money to reduce state property taxes. Its PAC is Just Treat Us the Same. Eyman said he turned in more than 238,000 signatures Monday.

61 Initiative 895: This initiative would allow insurance companies to offer health-care plans that are free of state coverage mandates. Supporters of the measure argue the mandates drive up the cost of health insurance, putting it out of reach for many small businesses. The PAC is Small Business for Affordable Health Care. The group said it is uncertain whether it will get enough signatures.

61 Initiative 861: The initiative calls for a mandatory life sentence after one conviction on certain sex crimes, including first- and second-degree rape, child rape, first-degree child molestation and kidnapping. Organizers say they have not collected enough signatures to make the ballot.

61 Initiative 883: The measure, backed by Bellevue Square owner and freeway booster Kemper Freeman Jr., would open commuter lanes on freeways to all traffic except during weekday peak hours. It also would earmark part of the state's existing gas taxes and sales tax on new and used vehicles to raise up to $10 billion to build more general-purpose freeway and highway lanes. The PAC is Let's Get Moving Washington. The group has dropped efforts to put it on the ballot this year.

61 Initiative 297: It aims to stop the federal government from using the state as a radioactive-waste repository until old wastes have been cleaned up. This was an initiative to the Legislature. When lawmakers declined to act, the initiative was automatically placed on the Nov. 2 ballot.

Andrew Garber: 360-943-9882 or agarber@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Friday, July 02, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

New rules on security left ferries scrambling

By Mike Carter
Seattle Times staff reporter


GREG GILBERT / THE SEATTLE TIMES Bill Henkel of the State Patrol and Butch walk between vehicles at a Seattle ferry dock yesterday, when new rules went into effect.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Washington State Ferries had to borrow explosives-sniffing dogs from throughout the state to meet federal security regulations that went into effect yesterday, or risk being shut down by the U.S. Coast Guard. The state has known that the new regulations were in the pipeline since Congress passed the Marine Transportation Security Act in 2002. The Washington State Patrol, which provides security for the ferry system, has known it would need dozens of bomb dogs since last December, when the state's proposed plan to comply with the act was submitted to the Coast Guard.

Still, as late as April, the WSP had just three explosive-detection dogs, officials have acknowledged. It won't have the trained dogs and handlers of its own that it needs until the end of the year, Capt. Fred Fakkema said.

The state's response to ferry security has been controversial. The Coast Guard last month ordered the ferry system to comply with the new regulations or face suspension of services. And the U.S. Attorney's Office questions whether state officials have taken seriously intelligence that seems to indicate the system has been under surveillance by possible terrorists.

That threat assessment, U.S. Attorney John McKay said, "has been portrayed in a benign manner" in recent public statements by ferry officials.

"There's nothing benign about it," McKay said. "And I don't believe the public has been properly informed."

Every day, more than 40,000 vehicles and 70,000 people load onto ferries in Washington, which runs the country's largest ferry system.

Washington State Ferries yesterday began a federally mandated security plan, allowing for the use of bomb-sniffing dogs and searches of vehicles. The dogs will be able to detect fireworks, and vehicles carrying them should allow for screening time. Illegal fireworks (firecrackers, bottle-rockets and skyrockets off tribal lands) should not be carried on ferries and will be confiscated. Legal fireworks include sparklers, ground spinners and roman candles. Ferry riders are advised to arrive early because of anticipated crowds for the Fourth of July holiday. According to Susan Harris-Huether, customer-information manager for Washington State Ferries, here are the busiest times for some of the ferry runs:

61 Anacortes-San Juan Islands: Busiest today, as well as Saturday and Sunday mornings. Vehicle passengers are advised to arrive two hours early. The return trip will be busiest Sunday evening and Monday. Parking will also fill up quickly.

61 Mukilteo-Clinton: Busiest this afternoon and tomorrow morning. The return trip will be busiest on Monday.

61 Edmonds-Kingston: Will crowd up this afternoon and Monday afternoon. Passengers should expect delays at noontime Sunday for a parade in Kingston.

61 Seattle-Bainbridge Island: Passengers are discouraged from using the ferry as a place to view the fireworks on Sunday.

For more information, please visit www.wsdot.wa.gov/ferries or call 888-808-7977.




The new regulations in Washington require patrols on board the ferries and other measures that officials won't discuss. Major components include a ban on unescorted cargo and the random screening of vehicles by explosive-sniffing dogs. If a dog indicates the possibility of explosives, police have cause to search the vehicle.

Little effect at docks

The new regulations did not seem to have much of an impact on ferry traffic yesterday.

Police were a visible presence, but no more or less than usual, according to regular riders.

"I haven't noticed a delay in loading or unloading on the ferry," said Ed Rittenhouse, 63, heading to Bainbridge from Seattle. "Today or any day, really."

However, Rittenhouse said he has been aware of heightened security in recent weeks, including more officers on the docks.

Since the Madrid train bombings in March, the U.S. government has warned that al-Qaida may be targeting public transportation systems.

"I don't believe there is a more vulnerable transportation system in the country," McKay said of the state's ferry system.

McKay's concerns are compounded by a threat assessment of the ferry system compiled by the FBI this spring. McKay would not release a copy, but said it contains a disturbing list of incidents involving possible surveillance of the ferry system.

"It appears that some group or organization has been watching the ferry system," he said. A number of the instances ― McKay said there were "more than 10 but fewer than 20" ― cannot be easily explained away as some lost tourist.

"This appears to be people gathering information, typing notes into computers, taking pictures," he said.

Scott Crabtree, the assistant special agent in charge of the FBI's Seattle office and the supervisor of the Joint Terrorism Task Force, said some of the information "seems to fit into the criteria of what might be pre-operational planning."

At the same time, he said, there is debate among even FBI agents as to the meaning of the intelligence.

"All I can tell you right now is that there is no specific threat to the ferry system here," he said.

"Aggressive time frame"

The U.S. Coast Guard posted the initial marine-security regulations in July 2003. They allowed shipping companies or ferry systems to come up with alternative plans, so long as they fit into the intent of the regulations and were in place by yesterday. The Coast Guard approved the ferry system's plan.

"Let's face it, that is an extremely aggressive time frame in a regulatory process like this," said Scott Davis, the safety-systems manger for the ferries.

The federal government had given the state $11 million in grants to help, but that wasn't enough and much of it was earmarked for specific projects, Davis said. The ferry system and the WSP had to wait until the state Legislature convened in January to fund key components of the plan, including the explosives-sniffing dogs.

Last month, the ferry system told the Coast Guard it could not meet its own schedule and proposed phasing in the improvements over the next 18 months.

The Coast Guard responded June 20 with a non-negotiable mandate to fully implement the security plan or risk shutting the ferry system down.

"They said they didn't have the resources," said Coast Guard Capt. Danny Ellis, the commander of the Port of Seattle. "If you got a plan approved, and then tell me you can't do it, I say you have to come up with an alternative. And if you don't, you will cease operations."

Physical vehicle searches

While the order stung the ferry service and WSP, it was welcomed by the state's lawyers, who saw it as legal cover for a controversial portion of the state's proposal: the ability to, if necessary, conduct random physical searches of vehicles.

After sharp criticism of the practice by civil libertarians, and a series of court rulings, the Attorney General's Office issued an opinion two years ago saying that under most circumstances, such searches were illegal under the state constitution.

There are exceptions, however, involving an express order of the federal government or special circumstances such as a threat, said Assistant Attorney General Steve Reinmuth. The Coast Guard's order and the FBI threat assessment fit both those exceptions, he said.

Providing the state remains at Marine Security Level One, the lowest of the three levels, the state has the resources to keep the ferries running. The WSP has enlisted 17 dogs from several federal and state law-enforcement agencies while it trains its own canine corps.

An increase to Level Two, however, would require screening three times the number of vehicles ― the exact number is secret ― and force the state to resort to physical searches in order to keep the ferries running.

A move to Level Two is mandatory if the Department of Homeland Security Threat Advisory moves from its current yellow to orange. Many law-enforcement officials, including McKay, predict that with the coming elections and the National Governors' Conference in Seattle, that will happen before the summer is out.

Mike Carter: 206-464-3706 or mcarter@seattletimes.com. Matt Rodriguez and Susan Gilmore, Seattle Times staff reporters, contributed.



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

 Redmond City Council makes wish list

By Nick Perry
Seattle Times Eastside bureau

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Redmond will have new parks, expanded boundaries, fewer cars on the road and better recognition of diversity ― if its City Council can fulfill a new wish list of projects. After several months of brainstorming, the council has finalized 32 objectives for the city. To improve the chances that the ideas will become reality, council members attached specific steps and timelines to achieve their goals.

Included in the wish list:

61 Preparing a park bond measure within the next two or three months and putting the measure to voters next year. The measure would likely help buy new parks and maintain existing facilities.

61 Creating a cultural-diversity task force by the end of this year. Redmond residents representing diverse groups and interests would join the task force to advise the council on how to "encourage, promote and celebrate" diversity.

61 Developing a plan for high-capacity transit ― a light-rail system, for instance ― within a year and planning for a multiuse transportation center near Highway 520 and Highway 202 by 2008.

61 Putting a transportation bond measure on the ballot in 2006. The bond would help improve roads and bike lanes.

61 Planning a public discussion this year on how to use railroad land that divides the downtown and deciding on how to use that land by fall 2005. Redmond is negotiating to buy the land from Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway.

61 Beginning a competition next year that awards a prize to the "best neighborhood" float or other entry in the July Derby Days festival.

61 Introducing five initiatives that would reduce by 30 percent the number of single-occupancy-vehicle trips by 2006. Also creating a plan by 2006 to convert some city vehicles to alternative fuels, such as biodiesel or hybrid technology.

61 Annexing all neighborhoods within the city's proposed annexation boundaries by the end of 2006.




61 Preparing a ballot measure by September that would seek a one-time property-tax increase. The measure could be placed on the ballot as early as November to stabilize tax revenues, particularly if anti-tax initiatives backed by Tim Eyman pass.

The wish list was largely welcomed Tuesday night by the city's strategic leadership team, a group of senior staff and elected officials. However, some staff members expressed worry over one priority: to have a citizens committee define what Redmond's core city services should be.

Redmond's public-works director David Rhodes said the idea "scares the bejesus out of me," and planning director Roberta Lewandowski agreed.

Lewandowski said businesses and municipalities often use such inventories to justify cutting back on staff and services.

But council members and finance director Lenda Crawford argued that the panel would help educate residents on what the city does and help them decide which functions are important for the city to continue performing.

The council plans to refine the wish list and formally adopt it as policy within the next few weeks.

Nick Perry: 206-515-5639 or nperry@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

James Vesely / Times editorial page editor
Full speed ahead on private ferry service








Mike Thorne

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

There will be no galley service on the state ferries this summer, admits Washington State Ferries Director Mike Thorne. When Aunt Tilly comes out this summer for that dazzling trip to Winslow and gawks at the scenery and the magnificence of living here, there'll be no hot chowder for Tilly.

This is a failure of both the employee unions and government and bears the whiff of powerful institutions considering ferry customers last.

Thorne sees a silver lining in this, and said last week in a visit to The Seattle Times that new ferry construction (the state plans four new ones) may include roll-on, roll-off food containers and other innovations. The ferry service, it turns out, will have airplane food.

But it's also the fact that Washington ferries are getting out of the passenger-only service, and a region that is growing in modules of urban centers around the Sound will need connections more than Aunt Tilly ever imagines.



Cary Bozeman.



Now comes Cary Bozeman, mayor of Bremerton, who says the following: "We are going to figure out a way to build a high-speed passenger ferry, from Bremerton to Seattle in less than 35 minutes, and we are going to build and operate the boat in the next three years."

Bozeman is not kidding. He says, thanks to U.S. Sen. Patty Murray, Bremerton is the recipient of $600,000 for a Water Transportation Research Institute to be located in the city. Its job is to figure out a boat that will offer 35-minute transit to Seattle from Bremerton without wake damage to the shoreline.

"We know when we get to that level of service, we attract young professionals who live in Bremerton and work in Seattle," Bozeman said.

The federal grant money just arrived last week and will be administered by Washington Department of Transportation in Bremerton. Creation of a research center will mean that in about 18 months, a boat design should emerge, according to Bozeman. Pacific International Engineering will do the hull research. The goal is a zippier ferry, something that will not leave behind the damage from big wakes, and not the 200- to 300-passenger vessels the state ferry service prefers. "We'll eventually buy three or four boats," Bozeman said. "They will be run by Kitsap Transportation with private operators."

The energetic mayor of Bremerton may be a tad optimistic if he thinks private operators can get that chicken past the wolf of the ferry unions. But let's admit the momentum for more passenger ferries is real, and moving across the inland sea of Puget Sound is imperative to a thriving region. If the state cannot afford to be in the passenger-ferry business, why should Bremerton, Seattle, Everett, Port Townsend or Kitsap County suffer?

That's not far from the message Thorne is delivering all over the state. Thorne said he believes the system can get much greater efficiencies from the four new boats, and that working with the unions for "critical mission" work at places such as Eagle Harbor can provide a higher level of service. State law mandates the four new state ferries be built in Washington.

Bozeman thinks the state ferry system should do its own job, but also get out of the way. "We can do this without a lot of government managing the ferry system," Bozeman said.

"The region is missing a bet not to run a local ferry system," Thorne said. He referred to the hiccuping local transportation plan that would have poured millions into local projects. Both Thorne and Bozeman seemed to be talking about two things: connections and options.

Connecting Bremerton and Seattle across the water without bridges is vital. Why can't we think of ourselves as a water-borne region with lots of options for ferry service going to lots of new places?

Stagnation is not our friend. Old ways of thinking of ferries is not the future's friend, either.

James F. Vesely's column appears Sunday on editorial pages of The Times. His e-mail address is: jvesely@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Friday, June 11, 2004 - Page updated at 12:42 A.M.

New station, route plans cater to bicycle commuters

By Katherine Sather
Seattle Times Eastside bureau


JOHN LOK / THE SEATTLE TIMES Ellen Butzel, right, a physical therapist from Group Health Cooperative, demonstrates proper riding form to Prashant Kamani, a bicycle commuter, yesterday during a rally at the Overlake Transit Center in Redmond.

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

For Redmond resident Ned Higgins, biking to work was like playing the video game Frogger. Road construction forced the Microsoft employee to dodge in and out of traffic on 124th Avenue Northeast, until he changed his route to go through downtown Redmond last year.

Yesterday at a bike rally at the Overlake Transit Center, he gave the city tips on how to make downtown more bike accessible.

The event was sponsored by the city and the Cascade Bicycle Club to celebrate the opening of a bike station at the center, which Redmond hopes will be a hub for its increasing number of bike commuters, said John Reesha, director of the Greater Redmond Transportation Management Association.

Yesterday's rally provided cyclists like Higgins the opportunity to comment on more plans to make the city easier for cyclists to navigate. A major part of Redmond's draft transportation plan, which it hopes to finish during the summer, is dedicated to cyclists.

"The plan adds to the designation of bike lanes and bike facilities, and starts to identify they're more part of the transportation system than simply recreational," Reesha said.


JOHN LOK / THE SEATTLE TIMES The new bike station at the Overlake Transit Station in Redmond features a room for cyclists to change their clothes. An information center and possibly a retail shop are planned there.


At the rally, cyclists were presented with maps of where the city is considering building more bike lanes, paved bike paths and paved shoulders. Cyclists could vote on the ideas they thought were most important. Those ideas are expected to be added to the plan.

"We want to make bike connections better downtown," said Carlos Hernandez, a representative of a Colorado firm that's helping the city draft the transportation plan. "The goal is to have the public tell us which areas are most important."

An idea that got much support was extending the Sammamish River Trail south to Sammamish and Issaquah, a proposal that has caused controversy with some property owners along the trail, said Joel Pfundt, a city employee. Redmond resident Genie Sheth, who bikes the Burke-Gilman Trail to work in Seattle each morning, said she would like to ride it recreationally.

"I can take Seattle to Redmond, but not Redmond to Sammamish," she said.

Other cyclists at the rally were looking for ways to make downtown Redmond safer. Reesha said bike commuting is increasing among people who live and work in Redmond. Population surveys in 2003 showed 61 percent of people commuting to work in the community lived in the city or in areas with Redmond ZIP codes.

"We're seeing people moving closer, and it's a very large percentage," he said. "It's a natural tendency to say OK, cars are an option sometimes. People are starting to explore other options."

Microsoft employee Miguel Llanos supported a proposal to add bike lanes to 166th Avenue Northeast, which he takes on his four-mile ride to work each day.

"I end up riding the sidewalk for five blocks," he said.

Dennis Neuzil, of the Cascade Bicycle Club, said Redmond's plans will help cyclists throughout the region. His club is assembling a regional bicycle route network in King, Kitsap, Snohomish and Pierce counties.

"Cities haven't looked at the bigger picture of connecting city to city," he said. "What we're proposing is an interstate bike program for the region."

The Cascade Club has worked with bike clubs throughout the four counties to map a plan it will present to the cities next month.

In Redmond, city employees hope the new bike station will encourage more locals to bike to work. Located in the Commuter Services building, it is equipped with a locked restroom and changing room that cyclists must register to use. Bike lockers and bike racks are also available.

Redmond's REI store is stocking a 200-square-foot cubby in the area with bike-maintenance brochures and safety information. It plans to sponsor monthly repair clinics at the site. Depending on community response, the store also may provide retail items such as books and repair kits.

"We see this as kind of a beginning test to see what it can really become," said Jason Orr, a media spokesman for REI. "What bike stations are throughout the country is kind of a new thing, so we're going to be figuring out what people will use the station for."

Katherine Sather 206-464-2752 or ksather@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Mukilteo
Some see raised median as annoying bump in road

By Rachel Tuinstra
Times Snohomish County bureau

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles


MUKILTEO The raised median that now runs down the center of the Mukilteo Speedway has made going to the grocery store a new challenge, says Teri Brittin.


Brittin, who works and lives near the speedway, or Highway 525, has watched as a massive road project begun in 2002 has progressed. She's not thrilled with the results.

"The median makes it longer to go anywhere. I hate it," Brittin said. "You have to hang a U-turn and come back around anytime you want to turn left. And the backup at the turn pockets is immense. Just going to Albertsons to go grocery shopping is more of a pain."

For many residents and merchants who travel or work along the speedway, the news is both good and bad as a nearly 2-year-old project winds to a close.

The good news is that the orange cones, traffic barrels and yellow tape that have lined the road for the past two years will soon be gone. Construction on the $13.7 million project to improve the speedway between about 132nd Street Southwest to Paine Field Boulevard should be completed by fall, said Marlin Lenssen, a state Department of Transportation (DOT) project engineer. The project was paid for through state and federal funds, and traffic impact fees paid by Boeing.

The work is the final piece to a larger $91.3 million project to widen and improve Highway 525 from Interstate 5 to Paine Field Boulevard. The project has been under way for about six years, Lenssen said.

The project widened Mukilteo Speedway from two to four lanes, with a raised median and left-turn pockets, and added sidewalks. The work was necessary to handle the traffic loads near Paine Field and the Boeing plant in Everett, said Lenssen, who is overseeing the project.

The DOT purchased 75 parcels of land bordering the speedway so the road could be widened by about 49 feet on each side, Lenssen said.




"There was a lot more traffic going through that area than it could handle," Lenssen said. "I'm sure it was getting at least a 'D' grade for traffic congestion."

It's been a long-awaited project for the city, said Rich Leahy, Mukilteo's city administrator.

"We've heard from the people who drive it who say they've seen dramatic improvements," Leahy said. "I've talked to a number of residents who say you can actually drive on the speedway now."

Though Brittin said she is glad to see sidewalks installed, she and other residents and speedway business owners are wary of the raised median, which replaced a continuous center turn lane. Instead, vehicles are restricted to using occasional midblock left-turn pockets or making U-turns at intersections.

Simone Torsleff, who works at the Convergence Zone, a restaurant, bar and pool hall, said she has seen her numbers of customers dip and hears complaints from the ones who do come in. The business, at 10809 Mukilteo Speedway, sits in the middle of a block without any left-turn lanes.

"Everyone who walks in says it's irritating. They have to go to the light and turn around," Torsleff said. "It was fine before this. Now, it seems more dangerous. I don't understand why they are using our tax dollars to build a median in the middle of the road."

Lenssen agrees that the median restricts vehicles ― that's what it's supposed to do.

According to state law, roads that carry more than 25,000 vehicles a day should not have continuous center turn lanes, Lenssen said. The law was enacted because statistics show the combination of high traffic volumes and a center turn lane results in an increased number of accidents, he said.

Traffic counts for Mukilteo Speedway show that it carries more than 30,000 vehicles a day, he said.

"I agree, it makes it more difficult to get where you want to go," he said. "It's a matter of safety. This way, more people can get through the area safely. It's a trade-off."

The median is also landscaped in many areas, something the city pushed for when the project was designed about 10 years ago, Leahy said.

"It's not like people can't get to places ― they just can't get to places using a suicide lane," Leahy said.

Center turn lanes have sometimes been called suicide lanes because of the accident rates of people using them.

"Medians are also common throughout the country. And they are beautification devices. It's a matter of having less accidents and more aesthetics," Leahy said.

The city has heard complaints about construction work limiting access to some businesses during some of the phases of the work, Leahy said. But those complaints have diminished as the construction begins to wrap up, he said.

For Stephanie Anderson, 19, the work can't be done soon enough. Anderson, who works at a drive-through espresso stand off the speedway, said she has about 100 fewer customers now than she did before construction closed one of the driveways to the coffee stand. Her tips have gone from about $70 a shift to about $40 a month, she said.

"You have all this dust from the construction. Customers cough and roll up their windows, and you're trying to make drinks," she said.

"But it needed to be done. There were no sidewalks before ― it was all gravel. And it will look nicer."

Rachel Tuinstra: 425-783-0674 or rtuinstra@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Thursday, June 24, 2004 - Page updated at 01:05 A.M.

Here and Now
Training day overhead




</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
The sound of low-flying planes over the Seattle area may be noticeable today as NORAD, the North American Aerospace Defense Command, conducts a series of training flights. Fighters and other aircraft will be flying at low altitudes as they test NORAD's rapid-response capabilities. NORAD has been conducting such exercises throughout the country and in Canada since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

Gay-pride weekend

Last-minute preparations are being made for this weekend's gay-pride celebration in Seattle. The main event, the Pride Festival, is Saturday and Sunday. The Pride Parade, a big draw, is Sunday. Last year, the parade entertained a diverse crowd of more than 100,000 people.

Sunday's parade will begin at 11 a.m. at Broadway and Pike Street, then continue north on Broadway and end at Volunteer Park. The festival takes place in the park.

Information about the festivities is at www.seattlepride.org and in today's Northwest Weekend section.

HIV testing

Sunday is National HIV Testing Day, focusing on what public-health officials say is a need for gay and bisexual men to get tested regularly. Health officials say HIV infections and sexually transmitted diseases are continuing at high rates. Several thousand King County residents and an estimated quarter of a million people in the United States have HIV infection but do not know it, health officials said.

Information about HIV testing and appointments is available at www.metrokc.gov/health/apu/resources/testing.htm, or by calling Public Health ― Seattle & King County's HIV/STD hotline at 206-205-7837 or 800-678-1595 (open from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays). Public Health ― Seattle & King County's HIV/AIDS and STD programs will staff a booth along the gay-pride parade route Sunday, offering free, confidential or anonymous testing for HIV and other STDs for high-risk people.

Tomorrow

Does your workplace have a pets-at-work policy? Humane Society workers say pets in the workplace help promote higher productivity and better employee morale. Tomorrow marks the annual Take Your Dog to Work Day, established six years ago by Pet Sitters International.




Traffic watch

Auburn: Highway 18's eastbound exit to the West Valley Highway (Highway 181) will be closed overnight tonight to widen the ramp. The eastbound offramp will close at 9 tonight and will reopen at 5 tomorrow morning. The westbound onramp will not be affected.


Bellevue: Three Interstate 405 ramps connecting Northeast Eighth Street to the freeway will be closed round-the-clock this weekend to rebuild freeway ramp connections. Starting at 10 p.m. tomorrow, the northbound onramp from eastbound Northeast Eighth, the northbound offramp to westbound Northeast Eighth and the northbound collector-distributor lane will be closed. An hour later, the northbound onramp from westbound Northeast Eighth and the right lane of northbound I-405 from north of Northeast Fourth Street to north of Northeast Eighth Street also will be closed.

As a result of the northbound lane closure, the northbound car-pool lane will be open to all traffic within the work zone. The northbound offramp to eastbound Northeast Eighth Street will remain open. All lanes and ramps will reopen by 6 a.m. Monday.

Can you help?

Seafair, the Puget Sound area's largest summer festival, kicks off in a couple of weeks. The opening salvo is the July 10 landing of the Seafair pirates at Alki Beach and the traditional milk-carton derby at Green Lake. The Seafair organization is seeking volunteers to help staff a number of events, including more than a dozen community parades. For volunteer information, call 206-728-0123, or e-mail: info@seafair.com. Seafair runs through the first weekend of August.

Here & Now is compiled by Seattle Times staff reporter Charles E. Brown and news assistant Suesan Whitney Henderson. To submit an item, e-mail herenow@seattletimes.com or call 206-464-2226.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Stephen Dunphy / Times staff columnist
Cargo totals to grow










 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Container and grain shipments in the state could grow dramatically over the next 20 years, according to a new study, putting pressure on existing road and rail systems. The 2004 Marine Cargo Forecast has been made periodically by the Washington Public Ports Association and the state Department of Transportation since 1980. Total volume of waterborne trade through state ports is expected to increase 66 percent between now and 2025, the end of the study period. Containers will be the fastest-growing segment of trade with Puget Sound traffic expected to grow from 2.8 million containers in 2002 to 6.9 million in 2025, a 4 percent annual growth rate.

Lower Columbia River grain exports are expected to grow 2.5 percent annually, nearly doubling from 8.5 million tons to 15.1 million tons.

Leaving, on a jet plane

Airline traffic is picking up again with the fourth month in a row of year-over-year gains in passengers, according to the Air Transport Association, a trade group that represents most domestic carriers. May totals were 6.6 percent ahead of May 2003, the ATA said.

But a report from the U.S. Department of Transportation tells another part of the story. A low-fare airline topped the monthly domestic passenger-traffic rankings for the first time last month, replacing the major network carriers .

Southwest Airlines carried 6.5 million domestic passengers last month, more than any other airline. A year earlier, Southwest ranked third behind Delta Air Lines and American Airlines. In April, Southwest ranked second behind Delta.

Southwest's top ranking in domestic passenger traffic culminates a long-trend of growth by low-fare carriers and lesser dominance by network carriers. In May 1990, for example, seven network carriers ― American, Delta, US Air, United Airlines, Northwest Airlines, Continental Airlines and TWA ― carried more domestic passengers than the 1.9 million carried by Southwest.

On the road again

Gov. Gary Locke heads south of the border Monday for a four-day trip to Mexico. Juli Wilkerson, director of the state Department of Community, Trade and Economic Development; Valoria Loveland, director of the Department of Agriculture, and a 19-member delegation of business and agricultural leaders will be part of the group.

Who goes on such trips? One example is Jim VanderGiessen, CEO of Pro Refrigeration, a 19-person firm in Auburn. Products are sold and distributed around the world to dairies, breweries, wineries and various other food-processing applications.




Washington state exported $607 million in products to Mexico in 2003, an increase of 40 percent from the previous year. Locke wants to encourage more exports of state goods to as well as work to make sure the state's products are not excluded due to tariffs and nontariff barriers.

Locke also has tentatively scheduled a trip to Asia in the fall, going to China and possibly Vietnam in mid-September. The trip would be the last for Locke as governor.

Stephen H. Dunphy's columns appear Tuesdays-Fridays and Sundays. Phone: 206-464-2365. Fax: 206-382-8879. E-mail: sdunphy@seattletimes.com

More columns at www.seattletimes.com/columnists


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Sunday, June 27, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

James Vesely / Times editorial page editor
James Vesely: Vortex: the rising I-90 corridor mega-route






</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
The new town of Suncadia, eventually the largest community in Kittitas County, began offering home sites this month. The mountain resort near Roslyn, home in 10 years to between 3,000 and 4,000 new residents, will surely help shape the Interstate 90 corridor that continues to burst with ideas and development.

Think of the corridor between two dots on the map: From Pier 46 on Seattle's waterfront out to the resort-residential complex near the crest of the Cascades. Watch what happens when that corridor unfolds, step by step:

61 Adjacent to the stadium complex in Seattle, the current maritime, container use of prime land south of the state ferry dock can't continue forever. All those Hanjin containers sit on land that can be swept into a vital part of the city: a new Alaskan Way Viaduct and redevelopment that includes Pioneer Square and points south. The location is just too valuable around the stadiums not to change and prosper.

61 Across the lake on the I-90 bridge, the recent deal for lane expansion will simply make the Eastside more accessible to buses and HOV lanes, connecting the growing south end of Seattle to south Bellevue and beyond.

61 Downtown Mercer Island is remaking itself. A half-dozen condo-apartment projects could shape the island's village center into something like north downtown Bellevue, with more retail and pedestrian-friendly places. The city's potential use of Luther Burbank Park on the waterfront is another amenity. The island park-and-ride lot is jammed daily as the I-90 corridor expands eastward.

61 The glass walls of offices between Factoria and 148th Avenue Southeast in Bellevue are an employment center that can draw on people living along the spokes of an expanded I-405 and I-90. An info center, the glass corridor takes advantage of quick access to Seattle and Sea-Tac Airport.

61 At 148th Avenue, Bellevue Community College has the second-largest student population of all higher-education institutions in the state. With nearly 40,000 students on campus a year, BCC can naturally mature toward four-year courses, especially in the high-tech fields that draw on professors and jobs in the nearby software industries. BCC is a traffic and brain hub, right off I-90.

61 The new I-90 overpass at Issaquah helps Issaquah Highlands realize its potential as residential and Microsoft suburb despite some lags and delays. New housing developments at I-90 and Highway 900 emulate the corridor's profile of nodules of denser residential, commercial and high-tech office space.

61 That's the same profile for Snoqualmie Ridge on Highway 18, and the cluster of homes at the commercial intersection of I-90 at North Bend. Been to North Bend lately? Beyond the outlet mall is a city emerging as an exurb on the rim of the larger urban metropolis.

After years of fights and legal actions, Suncadia is launched ― 10 square miles, or 6,000 acres ― with 60 percent remaining undeveloped. "Seattle is dying for a place like this," one homeowner in Suncadia told The Times' Elizabeth Rhodes. Compared with the six-hour trip to Sunriver, Ore., it's an hour and a half to hiking trails, three golf courses and weekend homes.

The next spurt of growth is coming. This region is too energetic and too well-positioned not to have another growth surge as it did in the mid-to-late 1990s. I think that's being realistic, not optimistic.

James F. Vesely's column appears Sunday on editorial pages of The Times. His e-mail address is: jvesely@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Danny Westneat / Times staff columnist
Bridge idea might rise above fray







KEN LAMBERT / THE SEATTLE TIMES Architect Roger Patten suggests replacing the Alaskan Way Viaduct with a suspension bridge over Elliott Bay. A miniature Space Needle sits in the upper right corner of his model as a point of reference.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
What to do about Seattle's Alaskan Way Viaduct came to architect John Ottenheimer in a flash. "I was thinking there had to be a better way than a tunnel, and it just hit me," says the Whidbey Island man, who learned architecture from Frank Lloyd Wright and helped erect 40 Wright-designed buildings, including New York's Guggenheim museum. For Burien architect Roger Patten, inspiration came from the din of the cars ― the viaduct's crashing "Detroit surf."

"I had been painting on Vancouver Island, and it was unearthly quiet," he said. "When I came back I was downtown and the noise was just banging off the viaduct's upper deck.

"It dawned on me right then ― we've got to get this thing out of here."

These two architects independently arrived at the same place: Each wants to replace the viaduct with a 2-mile-long bridge across Elliott Bay.

Ottenheimer's "Seattle Gateway Bridge" is a series of three concrete or steel arches. Patten's "Elliott Bay Bridge" is a suspension bridge, similar in appearance to the Golden Gate Bridge, supported by two towers as tall as the 76-story Bank of America building here.

Both architects sketch a route that has the bridge starting near the Battery Street Tunnel, arcing across the bay and rejoining land at the Seattle seaport south of Safeco Field.

The bridge deck would be 250 to 300 feet high in the middle, allowing ships to pass underneath. It would curve about a third of a mile out into the water. The idea is that standing on shore you wouldn't hear the traffic, except near the ends.

Such a bridge would radically alter downtown and Elliott Bay, by removing the viaduct to return the waterfront to the city, but also by placing a giant new structure through an unspoiled waterway.

It's a notion that was rejected by state planners two years ago. But people can't seem to stop wondering about it. Last week when I wrote about the joys of driving on the viaduct, I was swamped with e-mail asking, "Why not a bridge?"

"Am I the only citizen of Seattle that thinks a bridge over Elliott Bay is worthy of consideration?" wrote Clare O'Regan, a Ravenna resident.




Ottenheimer, 71, who lived with Wright for six years at his famed Taliesin architecture collective in Wisconsin, said bridges are beautiful to look at and exciting to drive across.

"None of the options they are discussing now make people happy," he said. "The drivers don't like the tunnel and others don't like the idea of rebuilding the viaduct.

"A bridge would enhance the views for the drivers, move the traffic off the waterfront and create a signature piece of architecture for the city."

Patten, 72, has pushed his bridge proposal for two years, showing a model at public meetings. He estimates a bridge would cost $1 billion. State officials say that's low but have not done a detailed cost analysis. The Golden Gate Bridge, which at 1.7 miles is slightly shorter, would cost $1.2 billion to build today, according to the public agency that operates it.

Add $800 million to repair the seawall and another billion or so for tearing down the existing viaduct and making other street improvements, and the total bridge project could still cost less than a $4 billion tunnel.

State records show the idea of a bridge was discarded early for three reasons: it would potentially interfere with shipping lanes, degrade fish and wildlife habitat and "substantially impact" the waterfront view.

It seems to me that countless bridges coexist fine with both ships and fish. Not always, of course ― the old West Seattle Bridge was disabled in the 1980s when a ship rammed it ― but maneuvering ships around two giant bridge piers ought to be manageable.

Certainly it would be a challenge to get environmental permits to build a bridge. And there's no doubt the structure would fundamentally alter our sense of Elliott Bay. The view west from the city is unique because there's not much manmade out there ― only water, mountains and the forested lowlands. It feels a bit like you're at the end of civilization.

On the other hand, Seattle's no longer a frontier town. Both Patten and Ottenheimer say a bridge could complement the view, not obstruct it. Imagine it lit up at night and it's easy to get excited about having a highway out there.

Viaduct project engineer Tom Madden said he's skeptical people would want a bridge. State officials also chose to keep the project within the existing Highway 99 corridor so as not to complicate it.

"We tried to play within our own sandbox," he said.

Ottenheimer said this is an understandable impulse, but one likely to lead to a mediocre end.

"If something bad is already there, it's easier to get people to accept the idea of putting something bad in its place," he said.

There are no plans to reconsider a bridge, Madden says. The state is set to announce its preference ― probably either rebuilding the viaduct or digging a tunnel ― at the end of the summer.

But another reality is that the state has raised only 4 percent of the money it needs for this project. Until there is both momentum and money behind a plan, it's fair to say the question of what to do with the viaduct is an open one.

So, what do you think? How about a bridge?

Danny Westneat's column appears Wednesday and Friday. Reach him at 206-464-2086 or dwestneat@seattletimes.com.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Monday, July 05, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Seattle may ban scooters on sidewalks, bike lanes

By Matthew Rodriguez
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
The Seattle City Council is expected to vote tomorrow to prohibit the use of gas-powered foot scooters on sidewalks and in bike lanes, a move that could force riders onto roads and shoulders. But the proposal has been criticized by a scooter salesman as well as an advocate for pedestrians. The City Council tabled it last week to make changes.

Gas and electric-motorized foot scooters, which have gained popularity in recent years especially among teens, have been criticized for their noise and because of safety concerns. Auburn and Issaquah already have restricted their use, and Bellevue is eyeing similar legislation.

Motorized foot scooters, as defined by the bill, are different from mopeds and motorcycles. They have handlebars, wheels 10 inches in diameter or less and can be ridden standing or sitting down, according to the bill.

The bill before Seattle's council would require gas-scooter riders to be 16 or older, to have mufflers on the scooter and to obey most of the same laws as bicyclists. Scooters would be required to have brakes and specified lights for nighttime riding. An amendment would prohibit passengers on scooters.

The bill also restricts operation of Segway vehicles, which are ridden standing up and have a wheel on each side of a foot board. They would be prohibited in bike lanes and on public paths as well, unless a rider has a physical disability. Scooters and Segways also would be prohibited on public-school playgrounds.

David Levinger, executive director of Feet First, a pedestrian-advocacy group, said it is important to note that scooters are not in the same category of vehicle as bicycles. He said scooters cannot be adequately lighted at night because of their shape.

He also questioned why the legislation seemed to encourage the use of electric foot scooters, which would be allowed on sidewalks, over gas ones, which would not.

"One would expect Seattle to have the strictest, most pedestrian-friendly, safety-conscious and environmentally friendly legislation around," he said.

Because the Seattle law would allow electric foot scooters on sidewalks and at night, "we consider the Seattle foot-scooter legislation to be weaker than not only Portland, Vancouver and San Francisco, but also to be, in many ways, behind the legislation of its neighbors such as Auburn," Levinger said.

He said there is no provision in state law that requires local lawmakers to accommodate motorized foot scooters. But several council members said state laws complicated crafting of the legislation.




"State law doesn't allow us to prohibit any of those scooters," said Councilman Richard Conlin, the bill's sponsor, "and it doesn't allow us to require driver's licenses."

Council President Jan Drago, who is backing the no-passenger amendment, described Conlin's bill as a "pilot," saying that it likely will be evaluated and that the council will be open to changes in the future.

Conlin, chairman of the council's Transportation Committee, said he has asked the state Department of Health to draft a helmet law for scooter riders, similar to one for bicyclists.

He said his bill aims to protect pedestrians and to address noise and safety complaints.

"I think it has strong support," he said. "I think everybody understands the concerns about these scooters."

Yale Wong, CEO of Galaxy Scooters in Seattle, questioned whether the legislation would make it safer for scooter riders. He said the vehicles are toys and should be kept off roads.

"You're actually asking for more accidents," Wong said. "They should not be on the road. You're asking for more trouble. They're not street legal."

Councilman Richard McIver said the question is, "Whose safety are we looking out for? ... I think our first responsibility needs to be to the pedestrian."

Matthew Rodriguez: 206-464-3192 or mrodriguez@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Tuesday, July 06, 2004 - Page updated at 12:01 A.M.

Our billion-dollar runway: Who will pay?

By J. Martin McOmber
Seattle Times business reporter


TOM REESE / THE SEATTLE TIMES Aerial view, looking south, of Sea-Tac Airport's current runways and taxiways, left. The land at right will be filled with 17.5 million cubic yards of dirt to extend the natural plateau on which the airport sits so the new runway, which will run parallel to the current ones, can be built.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>

Related stories History of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport Paine Field in Everett could end region's air-traffic pain


Few people took note last month when workers began clearing away a thick stand of trees and bushes clinging to the steep embankment that for years has marked the western edge of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. It was an important moment in the fight over the third runway, a project four years behind schedule and nearly double its original budget. And as the woods fell, so did the last major legal obstacle to completing the $1.13 billion runway.

But as the tangle of environmental challenges over the third runway clears, the Port of Seattle, which runs Sea-Tac, faces a different kind of thicket: a financial one.

Due to open in late 2008, the third runway will be among the most expensive built during an unprecedented construction boom at major airports around the country. To pay for it, Sea-Tac will raise rents and landing fees to some of the highest in the nation at a time most airlines are bleeding money.

The Port is scrambling to pay for the runway and terminal expansions amid rising complaints from airlines that say they can no longer afford them.

For Gina Marie Lindsey, Sea-Tac's outgoing director, the choice is simple: press forward with the runway or be hobbled by growing congestion and delays at the airport that will take a toll on the region's economy. "We have to afford this project," she said.

Runway opponents, whose legal and environmental challenges contributed to the ballooning cost of the project, have little sympathy for airport officials' troubles. "We thought when we started to see the costs skyrocketing, it would become such a burden that it would collapse from its own weight," said Bob Sheckler, mayor of Des Moines and chairman of the Airport Communities Coalition. "Why did they continue?"

Crowded skies

A rise in airline traffic challenges an airport where closely spaced runways limit the number of planes that can land in bad weather.

Tomorrow


Sea-Tac North? Expansion of Paine Field considered.


The third runway is the centerpiece of a $4.2 billion airport expansion, the first since the early 1970s, that includes new and expanded terminals designed to handle a rising tide of airline traffic that could pass a half-million flights a year by 2020.

More traffic means more delays. And, depending on how you measure it, Sea-Tac historically has suffered some of the worst delays in the country, with nearly one-third of its flights arriving more than 15 minutes late. That has subsided since the number of flights fell 18 percent after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. But airport officials said it is only a matter of time before the planes ― and the delays ― return.

"My guess is, by this time next year, we will have serious delays in dozens of airports," said Richard Marchi, senior vice president of the Airports Council International-North America, which represents airport executives.

The Federal Aviation Administration predicts about half of the country's major airports will see the number of flights at or above 2001 levels by the end of this year. That's especially true at hub airports like O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, where airlines have replaced larger jets with smaller regional planes that fly more often.

But at Sea-Tac, where the main commuter airline, Horizon, is switching to larger planes, the recovery is expected to take longer. Forecasters said Sea-Tac won't see a record number of flights again until 2012, four years after the third runway is set to open.

Opponents say the drop in traffic is another reason the runway should be scrapped. But Sea-Tac officials say they are glad to have the breathing room. The airport is the 16th-busiest in passenger volume in the country, handling some 26.8 million last year.

Sea-Tac has additional challenges: its closely spaced runways ― and the weather. On clear days, when pilots fly by sight, the airport can handle two streams of arriving aircraft. That's about 60 landings an hour. But when the clouds set in, which happens about 44 percent of the time, and pilots switch to instruments to guide their landings, the planes must line up single-file. Landings drop to 36 or fewer, and planes stack up.

The third runway, 2,500 feet west of the first, will allow two streams of traffic on cloudy days. It will allow 48 planes an hour to land because the aircraft must be spaced farther apart to land in poor weather.

Building boom

Nearly half the nation's largest airports are expanding their runways. The FAA says many others should as well, to avoid national air gridlock.

Sea-Tac planners began the push for a third runway in 1988; official approval came after eight years.

Sea-Tac isn't the only airport to roll out costly upgrades. In the past five years, 16 of the nation's 35 largest airports have either built additional runways, started construction or plan to begin soon. A recent FAA study concluded at least 11 more airports should add runways in the next 10 years to avoid gridlock.

The FAA has pushed runway construction as one solution to a congestion problem that reached a crisis in summer 2000. Congress has fueled the boom, by essentially doubling the amount of money available for airport construction annually to $3.7 billion. And despite the sharp downturn in traffic after Sept. 11 and the continued financial plight of airlines, only a few projects have been scrapped or delayed.

Sea-Tac's struggles with lawsuits and changing environmental regulations are well-known among airport executives.

So is the staggering price tag. Only the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport and Lambert-St. Louis International Airport have similarly expensive runways under construction. Like Sea-Tac, those projects required dramatically reshaping the landscape and faced stiff opposition from surrounding communities.

In St. Louis, the new $1.1 billion runway is the largest public-works project in the city's history. The airport had to buy 2,000 homes in the suburb of Bridgeton, which bitterly fought the project.

In Atlanta, costs skyrocketed when it was forced to move its fifth runway after stiff opposition from the town of Hapeville, which would have essentially been wiped off the map by the project. Now the $1.35 billion runway project and taxiway cross over a 10-lane highway and require a staggering 27 million cubic yards of fill.

"To get a runway approval in less than 10 years is unusual," said Marchi, of the airports council. "If you have a determined opposition, and they want to challenge the process, it can take a very long time."

Costly fight

Neighbors' lawsuits cause environmental improvements in the project, but could not stop it.


STEVE RINGMAN / THE SEATTLE TIMES The view from a mound of 5 million cubic yards of dirt, part of what will be needed to fill in land for the runway.


For all but a handful of communities within earshot of Sea-Tac, the 15-year battle to stop the third runway has largely faded into the background, eclipsed by other public projects: stadiums, rapid transit and a replacement for the Alaskan Way Viaduct.

Near Sea-Tac, however, the third runway is impossible to ignore. Since some construction began in 1997, the airport has poured about $377 million into the runway project. About one-third of that was spent buying property and moving families. Nearly 400 homes will be razed.

Dump trucks ― about 1,400 a day ― have begun carting the massive amount of dirt needed to expand the natural plateau on which Sea-Tac sits to make room for the new runway. The 17.5 million cubic yards of dirt is enough to fill Safeco Field more than five times.

Noise, pollution and the loss of millions of dollars in property tax on land that now belongs to the Port have taken a toll on the quality of life.

The cities of Des Moines, Normandy Park, Tukwila and Federal Way and the Highline School District, outraged over the way Sea-Tac has dealt with neighbors, formed the Airport Communities Coalition to fight the third runway in court and through environmental regulators.

The group has spent about $13 million and succeeded in forcing the Port to make costly changes in the project to better protect the environment, especially the quality of streams and groundwater affected by construction. But it hasn't stopped the project.

A May ruling by the state Supreme Court dealt a blow to the group's remaining legal efforts. "The [coalition] will not go away but will evolve into a monitoring coalition to make sure that all the conditions that are set are in fact met," said Sheckler, coalition chairman. "Litigation would not necessarily be our main goal, but it would be in our pocket."

Airlines balk at fees

Sea-Tac wants the airlines and the federal government to help pay for the billion-dollar runway.

All along, the coalition had hoped the delays and cost increases would make the runway too costly to build. That hasn't happened, but it has increased the financial pressure on the Port.

The airport plans to pay for the runway three ways. Money from the federal government, a share of the $4.50 passenger-facility charge levied on each ticket, and bonds that will be repaid with terminal rents and landing fees, which are paid by airlines. Those fees will rise once the runway opens.

As it stands, airlines will be responsible for about 49 percent of the total runway costs, or about $553.9 million. That is 173 percent more than they originally anticipated.

Making matters worse, the airport is borrowing heavily for other major projects that have expanded gates and terminals, and the price of that debt is hitting airlines now.

The money worries Alaska Air, parent company of Alaska Airlines and Horizon Air, which accounts for more than half the flights at Sea-Tac.

"We can't eat those costs," said Alaska Airlines executive Cliff Argue. "And as a result, they will have to get passed on one way or another to the flying public."

Prices are rising at other airports, too, as the bill comes due for runway and construction projects started several years ago, during the heyday of air travel. As airlines scour their budgets for savings, they are focusing attention on airport costs, which typically represent 4 to 7 percent of operating costs.

That has shed an unflattering light on Sea-Tac.

Sea-Tac, like other airports, sets its landing fees and terminal rents each year based on how much money it will need to cover the costs of running the airport plus the amount it will need to make debt payments.

Airlines look at the total as the "cost per enplanement," or the average amount they spend per passenger to use the airport. At Sea-Tac, that amount will need to grow more than fivefold from a low of about $4 in the mid-1990s to about $23 in 2009. That will make Sea-Tac one of the most expensive airports in the country, behind those in the New York area and Miami.

But the fallout could bring more than higher ticket prices.

In March, Sea-Tac's major airlines sent a letter to the FAA warning that the airport was heading for trouble unless the agency could find more money to support it. "The potential for $23 cost per enplaned passenger at Sea-Tac when the runway is complete simply does not work in the business model of any airline," the letter said. "There could be significant detrimental effects on air transportation service in the Puget Sound Region."

That same month, Southwest Airlines, the fourth-largest passenger carrier at Sea-Tac, trimmed three daily flights to Spokane, citing rising airport costs. The airline has cut flights to Sea-Tac 5 percent during the first five months of the year compared with the same period in 2003.

"We continue to be very concerned about costs at Sea-Tac," said Whitney Eichinger, a Southwest spokeswoman. "It is one of our most expensive airports."

Sea-Tac officials are scrambling to find a way to curb airline costs to $18 a passenger in 2009. In the spring, the airport asked the FAA to nearly double the $216.5 million earmarked for the third runway. Sea-Tac officials said the amount would essentially cover increases caused by federal environmental regulations.

But the $394.6 million would set a record, and the proposal was met with skepticism in Washington, D.C. The FAA is expected to decide by the end of summer whether to grant Sea-Tac's request.

"This is a big ask, no doubt about it," Sea-Tac's Lindsey said. "Every dollar we get from the federal government is a dollar the airlines don't have to pay."

Over the next few months, the airport will consider other ways to cut costs, including delaying other big-ticket construction projects, trimming operation-and-maintenance costs and trying to increase profits from parking and other non-airline sources.

The Port also is considering riskier ways to cut costs, including using flexible-rate loans and decreasing its revenue cushion by collecting less from airlines. Those decisions will be made during budget discussions this fall.

Cleared for takeoff

Airlines' support for the runway grows ― along with the price tag.

The airlines are partly to blame. Until this year, airlines could veto major construction projects if they didn't think they were needed. They have voted four times since 1997 to approve the third runway.

Several airlines opposed the project at first, but as the number of flights at Sea-Tac increased, so did support for the runway, even as the price tag climbed from the $587 million originally budgeted in 1997 to $773 million and the schedule slipped.

The final vote in 2001 was unanimous. That was before the budget climbed past $1 billion and airline fortunes diminished.

Still, Alaska and other airlines see little alternative to completing the third runway. While improved technology could make Sea-Tac more efficient, it can't do as much as more concrete can, said Argue, of Alaska Airlines. And few would relish the cost of creating another regional airport.

"All of the carriers have agreed that this is a project that needs to go ahead," Argue said. "Not only for the good of the airport, but for the good of the region as well."

J. Martin McOmber: 206-464-2022 or mmcomber@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Sunday, July 04, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

History of Seattle-Tacoma International Airport





FILE The new terminal at the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport terminal opened in 1949.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
1941: The Civil Aeronautics Administration approaches Seattle and Tacoma, offering to level the ground and build an airport runway if a city would offer the land, build a terminal and operate the airport. Neither city agrees. 1942: The Seattle Port Commission votes to assume responsibility for the new airport, coming up with two possible sites: west of Lake Sammamish or a site west of Bow Lake and Highway 99, which was selected. Ground is broken Jan. 2, 1943.

1944: Paving of the runway is completed. Seattle-Tacoma International Airport is dedicated Oct. 31, 1944. It cost $4.2 million, almost all federal money. United Airlines makes the first official landing.

1946: Voters approve a $3 million bond issue to build a modern terminal.

1947: Northwest Airlines begins operations at Sea-Tac. The first crash occurs at Sea-Tac when a plane overshoots the runway. No one is hurt.

1949: The new terminal opens.

1950: The main north-south runway is extended from 6,100 to 7,500 feet.

1951: Alaska Airlines begins operations.

1954: Sea-Tac's annual passenger count reaches 1 million.

1955: Runway is extended to 8,500 feet.

1958: Runway is extended to 10,200 feet.




1959: The north concourse of the Administration Building is finished. Japan Airlines is the first overseas airline to operate in Seattle.

1961: The south concourse of the Administration Building is completed.

1968: Construction begins on 9,450-foot second runway, parallel to the first.

1970: Second runway is completed. The airport freeway road is linked to Interstate 5.

1973: The new main terminal and satellite terminals are dedicated.

1978: The airline industry is deregulated. By 1984, 26 major carriers serve Seattle, more than double the 12 before deregulation.

1985: Airport planners say 20-year air-traffic projections indicate a third runway is not necessary.

1988: Due mainly to the arrival of Horizon Air, annual traffic surpasses that projected for 2005. Airport planners say a third runway is needed.

1993: The Puget Sound Regional Council directs the Port of Seattle to move forward on planning studies for a third runway.

1996: Port Commission approves development of an 8,500-foot runway. First lawsuits against project filed.

1997: Port budgets $587 million for project.

1999: Runway cost estimate grows to $773 million.

2001: Pollution Control Hearings Board puts a hold on the state permit to fill 18 acres of wetlands at the center of the dispute over the runway.

2002: Port wins a key permit for the third runway from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, allowing the Port to fill wetlands. Pollution-control board grants a water-quality permit for the runway but imposes 16 conditions for construction.

2003: Development delays push the third-runway price tag to more than $1 billion.

2003: Federal judge upholds wetland-construction permit, dismissing a suit filed by runway opponents.

2004: Washington State Supreme Court settles one of the last major legal challenges to the third runway, clearing the way to start major construction on the $1.13 billion project this summer.

2004: Port officials say the runway could open in 2008, 20 years after airport officials raised the idea.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Guest columnist
Proclaiming independence from imported oil

By Floyd J. McKay
Special to The Times

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>

As the firecrackers and aerial bursts of our traditional Independence Day celebrations fade, Americans might ponder the need for independence in a 21st-century context.

Just as our Founding Fathers bristled under control of England, Americans today need to proclaim independence from imported oil, particularly from the volatile Middle East oil patch.

Yet, this is one of the topics we don't hear about in the presidential campaigns; it seems to be part of that unseen/unheard issue, the environment. Neither campaign is addressing an issue that polls consistently show resonates with a majority of voters.

In his 2004 State of the Union message, President Bush did not even mention the word "environment." The topic has fallen off the plate of the current leadership of the Republican Party, which has turned its back on the considerable legacy of Republicans in environmental policy. Richard Nixon presided over some of the most far-reaching environmental laws in our history, and Theodore Roosevelt is considered by many as our first environmental president.

If the Republicans have abandoned the field ― and clearly they have in the past several Congresses and in the Bush administration ― where are the Democrats, and Sen. John Kerry, once rated the top environmental advocate in the Senate?

Both sides are scared to step off a few predictable platforms ― terrorism, Iraq, the economy, taxes ― and venture into areas that might scare off swing voters. But the environment should attract, not deter, swing voters; certainly in the Pacific Northwest.

Energy independence cuts several ways, which should make it more attractive as a campaign issue.

It has always been an economic issue; oil shocks of the '70s showed how an increase in OPEC prices or a reduction in supply can shock the American economy. Until 2001, most of the congressional studies on oil imports focused on economic impacts.

But as long ago as 1997, Congress was warned of military implications from our dependence on oil imports. A Congressional Research Service study that year warned Congress to look beyond economic impacts. "Additionally, there is the argument that some U.S. military expenditures could be avoided if the United States were less dependent on Persian Gulf oil," the study noted, six years after the first Gulf War. On Sept. 11, 2001, that warning should have been recalled.

In addition to the economic and military implications of dependence on Middle East oil, our environment needs reduced emissions from oil-burning motors of all sorts, but primarily from automobiles. Emissions play a huge role in global warming, which simply cannot continue to be ignored in the face of overwhelming scientific evidence.

If we would heed that warning, and reduce our emissions, we would hit a trifecta: economic, military and environmental. Where is the candidate who has a program for this obvious need?

The Bush administration's answer is to find more places to drill, in particular, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. But drilling is a short-term fix, not a long-term answer.

In response to the oil shocks of the '70s, we adopted conservation measures to reduce dependence on foreign oil, and they have helped us reduce in percentage terms our dependence on the Middle East. But we have not expanded those conservation measures to keep up with our growth in energy demands.

A 2002 paper for Resources for the Future, a Washington, D.C., institute on environmental issues, sums up the choice in terms of national security: "Demand reduction outperforms supply increases because every barrel of oil we keep or take out of the economy reduces the harm of disruption, and demand reduction can proceed at a greater scale, longer life, and lower cost than supply increases, thereby diminishing the likelihood of disruption more effectively." We should worry about disruption.

It is increasingly apparent that the Middle East will be a very shaky place for years to come. Our military adventures in the region are forcing us to come to grips with our dependence on the gulf's oil. Yet, we remain in denial.

For reasons of the economy, national security and the environment, the pace car for the 2004 campaign should be the Prius, not the Hummer. Candidates should pledge to improve the mileage efficiency of cars, either by tax incentives or tougher regulations. National transportation policy should recognize that we are increasingly an urban nation and put a priority on moving people efficiently and with less fuel in urban areas.

We are too greedy to achieve true independence from foreign oil. Less reliance is a modest goal, one we must insist upon in 2004.

Floyd J. McKay, a journalism professor emeritus at Western Washington University, is a regular contributor to Times editorial pages. E-mail him at floydmckay@yahoo.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



China, U.S. have agreed to big jump in air traffic

By The Associated Press


 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

WASHINGTON ― The United States and China agreed to increase dramatically the amount of air traffic allowed between the two countries over the next six years, the Transportation Department said yesterday.

The number of airlines permitted to fly in the U.S.-China market will increase from four to nine. The number of flights allowed from each country will grow from 54 to 195.

Northwest Airlines, United Airlines, FedEx and United Parcel Service now serve the U.S.-China market.

American Airlines Chief Executive Gerard Arpey said the airline is keenly interested in joining them. "China would be a sensational addition" to American's route network, Arpey said in a prepared statement.

FedEx issued a statement applauding the deal because it will allow cargo airlines to establish hub operations in China.

Flight limits have made air-cargo rates from China to the United States the highest worldwide and almost double the global average, said Brian Clancy, principal at freight consulting firm MergeGlobal.

Added competition will reduce shipping rates for retailers such as Wal-Mart and Target, whose imports from China include everything from baby strollers to clothes, calculators and DVD players.

The added flights could shift some cargo to all air from a combination of air and sea transport that now moves by sea to Korea and then is flown to North America, Clancy said.

Airlines also will be able to fly wherever they want. Today, U.S. passenger airlines are restricted to five Chinese cities and Chinese carriers are limited to 12 U.S. cities.






Material from Bloomberg News is used in this report.



Copyright 08 2004 The Danny Westneat / Times staff columnist
Viaduct: Vroom with a view






 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

I am not much of a car enthusiast. Some people wax poetic about cornering in a road-hugging speedster. For me, driving is more about chugging in a smog-spewing junker. It's for little else but getting there.

Unless, that is, I'm on the Alaskan Way Viaduct.

I have driven in all 50 states. Exceeded only by scenic routes such as Montana's Beartooth Highway, the vilified concrete esplanade on Seattle's waterfront is among the most exhilarating drives in the nation.

When you rise up out of Sodo, northbound into that curving corridor of brick and glass and ferries and water, it's like you're a chimney sweep from "Mary Poppins," dancing on the rooftops. At 55 mph.

The blur of historic Seattle backed by skyscrapers, the harrowing drop to the sound, the brilliant white Olympic Mountains ― it's the best view in Seattle. It lasts two minutes. Other vistas may be prettier, but they don't come with an adrenaline rush.

When the state asked people what they want to do with the viaduct, the most widely-held opinion was not surprising: The structure is hideous and ought to be demolished.

But keeping the viaduct as a "motorist's dream," as it was hailed when it opened in 1952, was a strong runner-up.

Other than how to pay for it, this is what the viaduct debate has come down to. Either you want to bury it because it ruins the city's shore, or you want to keep it because nothing beats a waterfront tour in your personal land cruiser, the windows down and the stereo up.

Led by these competing camps, the two serious contenders are to rebuild the viaduct as is, or replace it with a tunnel. Rebuilding is cheaper by about a billion dollars. A tunnel is supported by virtually all powers-that-be: downtown businesses, local governments and various civic elite.

The state will make its choice in two months.




Ignoring the financial questions for now, this debate is a kind of character test for Seattle. We constantly wring our hands about how Portland and Vancouver, B.C., have grown better. They turned away the car culture in favor of mass transit and pedestrian-scale living.

My head agrees with that. It is insane that a city in a setting this gorgeous chose to build a 60-foot-tall concrete edifice on its shoreline.

But cars don't tug at the brain. They are about freedom and power. The mobility they provide is a democratizing force. The ugly viaduct is a beautiful thing because it gives anyone with a car a glorious view. The guy in the rusted 1983 Volvo (that would be me) arguably gets a better view than the folks in those Pike Place Market condos.

Right now, though, I'm sitting at a computer, and I've got to go with my head. Tunnel the viaduct. Open up the waterfront. No question, it's the right thing to do.

Besides, says my head, haven't we bowed down to the almighty automobile long enough around here?

Yesterday, as I whisked along above Elliott Bay, a big grin on my face as the sun punched through the morning haze and bathed the mountains in light, my head was nowhere to be found.

Danny Westneat's column appears Wednesday and Friday. Reach him at 206-464-2086 or dwestneat@seattletimes.com.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Saturday, July 03, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Tukwila says Sound Transit must provide more parking

By Eric Pryne
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
The city of Tukwila wants Sound Transit to provide more parking at the south end of its light-rail line than the agency had planned.

Tukwila's Community Development Department decided this week that Sound Transit must build 600 parking spaces at the South 154th Street light-rail station. Sound Transit had filed a proposal last year to provide about 460 stalls.

Spokesman Geoff Patrick said Sound Transit hasn't ruled out an appeal. The agency has until July 15 to ask the City Council to modify or overturn the department's decision.

The extra parking could cost as much as $6 million and would require buying more land, Patrick said, but the additional expense could be absorbed by contingencies already built into the light-rail project's $2.44 billion budget.

Jack Pace, deputy director of the Tukwila department, said the additional stalls are needed to avoid spillover parking on neighborhood streets that could inconvenience businesses and residents. Sound Transit submitted a modified proposal for 600 spaces, he said.

But Patrick said that plan was part of the negotiating process and isn't Sound Transit's official position.

The South 154th Street station, near the Highway 99-Highway 518 interchange in Tukwila, is the southern terminus of a planned 14-mile light-rail line starting in downtown Seattle. From 154th, shuttle buses would carry rail passengers south to nearby Seattle-Tacoma International Airport.

The rail line is scheduled to open in 2009. Construction began last fall.

The park-and-ride lot at South 154th would be the only one on the line. Sound Transit and Tukwila have disagreed for months on how much parking should be required.

Last December, Sound Transit estimated demand would require 420 spaces in 2011 and 720 in 2020. In April, a consultant to Tukwila offered much higher estimates: 875 spaces in 2011 and 1,330 in 2020.




To provide that much parking, Sound Transit probably would have to build expensive garages.

Tukwila's decision also requires Sound Transit to monitor the number of cars parked in the 600-space lot and on nearby streets, and provide more parking ― up to 1,330 stalls ― if certain thresholds are exceeded.

Patrick said Sound Transit likes the idea of linking construction of more parking to demonstrated demand.

Sound Transit needs several other permits from Tukwila. The city and the regional transit agency have a history of contentious relations.

Two years ago the City Council rejected a pact outlining how the city would handle light-rail permit applications. Some members were upset the line wouldn't serve the Southcenter Mall area, Tukwila's retail and employment hub. Others said the project was a waste of money.

For a time, the rejection appeared to threaten the project's future; the Federal Transit Agency had ordered Sound Transit to get the agreement signed before applying for needed federal grants to build the line.

The federal agency later dropped that requirement, and Sound Transit got the money.

Eric Pryne: 206-464-2231 or epryne@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company


Wednesday, June 16, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Guest columnist
Attention to design detail critical to monorail success

By David Coleman
Special to The Times


SEATTLE MONORAIL PROJECT This conceptual drawing shows the monorail heading south down Second Avenue.

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

The recent opening of Seattle's new downtown library has made good design the talk of the town. After years of thoughtful planning and a drive for excellence, we are finally ex-periencing the fruits of our civic commitment.

Yet, in the shadow of our recent success lies another opportunity to promote quality urban design that dwarfs the library in scale and impact: The Seattle Monorail Project (SMP).

In the coming weeks, the Seattle City Council will consider design elements of the new rapid-transit system. The decisions council members make will affect our city for decades to come. In terms of impact, this project is on par with the Alaskan Way Viaduct and Interstate 5 corridor.

Allied Arts took a close look at the SMP's plans and identified several points where the design of the monorail is especially critical. What follows is a partial list of elements that, if designed appropriately, will help make the final product worthwhile:

61 Weaving a 14-mile elevated structure through a busy city is awkward at best. Because Seattle's urban character is mature, the designs for the guideways and stations must integrate seamlessly within the existing fabric. Vancouver placed its SkyTrain underground through its downtown core. If we must run the monorail above ground, the girth and footprint of the structural supports must be minimized. This can only happen with a steel structure. Due to its bulk, concrete, as currently proposed, cannot meet these standards.



David Coleman



61 Monorail guideway switches are inherently large, ungainly, utilitarian structures that create streetscape conditions similar to those below highway viaducts. In addition, switches are moving parts. The more moving parts in a system, the greater the likelihood of failure and the need for repair, compromising operational efficiency. We recommend a dual-track system throughout the entire route, as originally proposed to the voters.

61 Our historic bridges ― Montlake, Fremont, University and others ― inspire civic pride. Yet, the proposed monorail bridge in Ballard is clumsy and industrial, clearly driven by cost. The new "Ballard Bridge" should be a slender, elegant and sculptural landmark that Seattle can be proud of, not a scar on the Ballard, Queen Anne and Magnolia neighborhoods.

61 The International Fountain area at Seattle Center is a local treasure and one of the few green spaces near the downtown core. It is arguably Seattle's living room. Why mar this park by running the monorail through it when other, more viable options exist? The monorail belongs in the existing transportation corridor ― the street. The City Council's recent, narrow decision to place the route through the fountain grounds should be reversed.

61 The proposed 750-foot skybridge from the Virginia Station to Westlake Mall will cause significant harm to downtown Seattle. City after city has learned the hard way that skybridges hurt downtown communities by segregating people from the streets below. Instead, if even a fraction of the cost of this detrimental skybridge were applied to improving pedestrian connections in and around Westlake ― such as awn-ings, signage, lighting, paving, street furniture and improved access from sidewalks to retail uses in Westlake Center ― the entire neighborhood would benefit, including the center.

61 The King Street Station is a cherished icon with deep historical significance. The monorail's current route above the station's front door on Third Avenue will overpower the station's entrance and greatly detract from the architectural contribution this building brings to the streetscape and the skyline. Instead, the route should be moved to Fourth Avenue, already a major transportation corridor, enabling the monorail station to be closer to the rail and bus tunnel.

61 Around several stations, the SMP will acquire and subsequently sell land to developers. Because station placement will create significant increases in land value for these and other surrounding properties, the city should ensure the zoning for these improved parcels be leveraged to meet the concerns and interests of all citizens, not just investors. To this end, redevelopment of such parcels should go through the city's design-review process.

61 While many of the proposed monorail station designs are promising, there is currently no mechanism to ensure they are actually built that way. The city and SMP should require the "Design-Build-Operate-Maintain" contractors bidding for the monorail contract to build, without significant revisions, these stations as planned by the local communities and designers.

While we applaud the SMP's stated goals ― "on time, under budget and excellent design" ― we also recognize that these goals are often at odds with one another. The monorail will be a legacy to our current decisions, either inspiring or discouraging the future development of mass transit. A well-designed monorail will illuminate the dreams of future generations. Conversely, a monorail designed and built with a primary focus on expedience and fiscal conservatism runs the risk of creating a long-lasting scar on our cityscape, not unlike those caused by the viaduct and I-5.

We only have one chance to get this right. If the current monorail plan is anything short of the very best, there is more work to be done.

David Coleman is an architect and co-chairman of the Urban Environment Committee at Allied Arts of Seattle, www.alliedarts-seattle.org


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Tuesday, June 15, 2004 - Page updated at 05:50 P.M.

City council approves monorail's west route

By Mike Lindblom
Seattle Times staff reporter

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles


Other links
 Seattle City Council monorail page
 Seattle Monorail Project
 Monorail Recall
 OnTrack


Plans for a new Seattle monorail gained additional momentum yesterday when the City Council voted 8-1 to approve the route through the western half of the city. Costs and design are still unknown, but the vote showed that politically, at least, the project is viable. Several council members said they are committed to building the line.

"Every major transportation project kicks up some dust. Some would call this a Saharan sandstorm," said Councilman Nick Licata. "But once the winds die down the monorail will be a winner."

The voter-approved monorail tax passed in 2002 by just a few hundred votes, but the council is treating it as a mandate: "We're living in an era of close margin when it comes to votes," Councilman Peter Steinbrueck said.

Yesterday's vote locks in the same 14-mile alignment from Ballard to West Seattle that monorail board members approved in March.

The council's only major change was to require more separation between trains and buildings ― at least 14 feet along Second Avenue, 10 feet on West Harrison Street near Seattle Center, 10 feet on California Avenue Southwest in West Seattle, and 20 feet from the new Merrill Gardens retirement high-rise in West Seattle, along 35th Avenue Southwest.

Councilman Richard Conlin cast the dissenting vote, objecting to the stretch through Seattle Center. Transportation systems should be kept on the streets, he said, "not foisted off on a public commons, so it runs through the heart of what we advertised as the world's premier gathering place."

The council's next step is a June 28 vote on the monorail's "transitway agreement," which sets out the requirements for insurance liability, skybridges, and proof the monorail agency can afford to finish the line.

"Have no illusions, the hardest part is ahead," Councilman Jim Compton said. "The numbers have to work. They have to be scrutinized by this council."

Henry Aronson, of the group OnTrack, which is critical of the project, said the transitway agreement should contain specific station designs and ensure that the city's review is done by independent experts.

A separate group, Monorail Recall, is behind an initiative campaign that would prevent the city from issuing construction permits for the project. The group has recently hired paid signature gatherers in its effort to qualify the measure for the November ballot.




Treasurer Liv Finne likened her group to the biblical hero David battling the giant Goliath. "We need help. We need people to give us money. We need people to give us attorneys," she said.

Initiative 83 has collected 8,283 signatures, she said, with hopes of gathering 8,000 more from volunteers by mid-July. A private company has been paid $16,500 to collect 5,000 more, she said. To put the measure on the ballot, monorail opponents must collect 17,229 valid signatures, Finne said.

However, the monorail agency has filed two lawsuits to block the initiative. One suit is challenging the ballot title, saying it is too vague; the other suit argues that the monorail permits are a land-use matter that is not subject to an initiative.

A hearing on the ballot-title suit is scheduled Friday. Judge Steven Gonzalez said last week that if the ballot title were thrown out, there is some chance that the signatures collected so far could be thrown out.

Mike Lindblom: 206-515-5631 or mlindblom@seattletimes.com




Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

 Monday, June 21, 2004 - Page updated at 10:29 A.M.

Four killed in I-90 wreck after colliding with elk

By Nick Perry and Doug Merlino
Seattle Times staff reporters

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Four people, including a father and son, were killed, and a fifth person critically injured when their car struck an elk and plunged off an embankment on Interstate 90 early yesterday. The crash ranks among the most deadly single-car accidents in state history.

Three of the men were farm workers from Mabton, Yakima County, a relative said, while the fourth man was a carpenter working at the Hanford nuclear reservation.

Those who died at the scene were Rafael S. Gonzalez, 42, and his son, Enrique Gonzalez-Reyna, 19; Jesus P. Reyna, 26; and a woman, Josefina Alvarez, who worked at a pizza parlor. A passenger, Leonardo Gonzalez, 20, a second son of Rafael Gonzalez, was critically injured and taken to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle.

Gonzalez remained in critical condition last night, a Harborview spokeswoman said.

Miguel Reyna, a cousin of Jesus Reyna, said three of the crash victims were headed to Seattle-Tacoma International Airport en route to Alaska, where they planned to do seasonal work in fish processing. Jesus Reyna and his wife, Alvarez, were dropping them off, family members said. It's not clear who was driving at the time of the accident.

Family members said the Gonzalez family had been in Mabton since 1997, and the Reyna family was in the area since 1991. Rafael Gonzalez leaves behind a wife and two other sons. Jesus Reyna and Alvarez had two daughters, ages 2 and 4. Many people in the town were meeting last night to talk about the tragedy, said Mabton town Councilman Ernesto Armendariz .

The rural town, between Yakima and the Tri-Cities, is home to about 1,900 people, many of whom work on dairy farms or in the fields harvesting asparagus, peaches and cherries, Armendariz said.

According to the State Patrol, the victims' Honda Accord was traveling west near North Bend at 4:50 a.m. when it hit the elk and veered over an elevated stretch of the highway. The car fell about 25 feet, landing upside-down on Garcia Road below. The elk was also killed.

The force of the impact crushed the car's roof, said Greg Tryon, the acting Battalion Chief for Eastside Fire & Rescue. The sole survivor, Reynaldo Gonzalez, was semi-conscious. He was ejected through the sunroof.

"His entire body was underneath the vehicle," Tryon said. "We raised the vehicle up using the rescue equipment we had and we were able to pull him out ... he was not talking to us, but he was responding to stimuli."




Several North Bend residents said yesterday that elk are a common sight.

"I have them come through almost every other night," said Robert Plute, who owns two acres on the east side of town. "I would say there are about 10 in the herd. You walk out at night and almost walk right into them. It's kind of scary."

Plute said some of the bulls stand 5 or 6 feet high and can often be seen at the side of the highway. Some residents have hit the animals, he said. Tryon said firefighters see several fender-benders involving elk along I-90 east of North Bend, especially in autumn. But he said no one could recall any accident nearly as serious.

The deadliest single-car crash in state history was in July 2001, when six young people were killed when their overloaded car hit a bridge pillar in Auburn. One woman survived the crash, in which alcohol was involved.

Nick Perry: 206-515-5639;

Doug Merlino: 206-464-2243 or dmerlino@seattletimes.com

Charlene Koski, with the Yakima Herald-Republic, contributed to this report.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Friday, July 02, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Danny Westneat / Times staff columnist
A bridge to build a dialogue






</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
My, Seattle, how you've changed. When I wrote Wednesday about two architects who want to replace the viaduct with a bridge across Elliott Bay, I was sure you would recoil. I thought you would defend the sanctity of our unspoiled harbor and that priceless western view. I figured the vestiges of Lesser Seattle would decry the blasphemy of turning us into San Francisco, complete with a copy of the Golden Gate.

Instead, you love the bridge.

You were exuberant about the beauty and allure of bridges. You noted how it could be built without disrupting downtown or traffic. You argued it would enhance the harbor, not defile it.

"The Elliott Bay Bridge ... is the most exciting public-works project I've heard of in the 10 years I've been in Seattle," wrote David Tootill of Mercer Island.

"We would get two views, one of the mountains and one of the city!" gushed Seattle's Chris McMuldroch. "And we would gain an inner harbor like Victoria, or Vancouver's Granville Island."

"This is no longer a small town that can get by on small solutions," wrote Seattle's Liz Walsh. "Fifty or 100 years from now, do we want to be rebuilding the viaduct, or attracting tourists and locals with our inspiring waterfront?"

By a 4-to-1 ratio, readers favored a bridge over a tunnel or a new viaduct.

In all, I received 208 e-mails and phone calls ― 149 for a bridge, 36 opposed and 23 with no clear opinion.

This is hardly a scientific sampling, and it doesn't mean Seattle supports a bridge. It's intriguing, though, isn't it?

In comparison, in a two-month comment period that included three public hearings, the state received a total of 664 opinions on its five viaduct options. The favorite: a tunnel, backed by 239.




What was striking about the response is that bridges are not like other roadways. People love bridges. Readers were excited to name it ― Olympic Bridge, Paul Allen Bridge (with him paying, of course), Westneat Way (from a reader who said the bridge would be the worst mistake in city history).

Many said they would be first in line to drive it. One suggested opening it only to pedestrians for the Fourth of July fireworks show.

Those opposed made compelling arguments, too.

"It shows a complete lack of respect for what makes the Seattle waterfront great ― an unobstructed view of Elliott Bay ... and the Olympics," wrote Todd Bernave of Green Lake.

It cuts too close to Seattle, others said, and is flawed aesthetically because bridges should connect land masses, not bypass cities.

I wrote about the bridge because it didn't get the consideration it should have and the alternatives, such as a tunnel, seem to please no one. A bridge deserves a closer look.

There's only one hope for achieving that. What to do with the viaduct is about to be decided by two people: state Transportation Secretary Doug MacDonald (360-705-7054, MacDonD@wsdot.wa.gov) and Mayor Greg Nickels (206-684-4000, e-mail form at www.cityofseattle.net/mayor).

All you can do is tell them what you told me.

Danny Westneat's column appears Wednesday and Friday. Reach him at 206-464-2086 or dwestneat@seattletimes.com.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company
Friday, July 02, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Plans to add passenger-ferry service praised at state hearing

By Susan Gilmore
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Most days, David Bruce wakes up at 5 a.m., drives from his home in Kingston to a park-and-ride lot at the Agate Pass Bridge, rides his bicycle to Bainbridge Island and catches a ferry to his law practice in Seattle. At best it takes him an hour and a half, at worst, hours. That's why Bruce told the state Utilities and Transportation Commission (UTC) yesterday that he supports a passenger ferry between Kingston and downtown Seattle.

"This will give me another hour a day with my children, and another hour is priceless," he said, adding that he'd even pay $50 round-trip because time is worth that much to him.

The UTC held a hearing in Kingston yesterday on a proposal by Aqua Express to begin passenger-ferry service between Kingston and Seattle, and those who testified strongly urged the state to approve the permit.

The UTC expects to decide by the end of the summer.

Many at yesterday's hearing, including Bruce, pointed out that the state once planned to introduce foot-ferry service between Kingston and Seattle but dropped the plans when Initiative 695 passed in 1999, carving a hole in the ferry budget. Many said they moved to the Kingston area because they thought there would be a ferry linking it with downtown Seattle. Now, the ferry from Kingston goes to Edmonds.

When Bill Fry retired from his job in Seattle, he moved to the Kitsap Peninsula because he thought there would be a ferry from Kingston to Seattle. "As a retired person on a fixed income, I've not gone to Seattle to see my friends like I want to," he said in urging the UTC to approve the permit.

The likelihood of approval gained strength Wednesday when the Inlandboatmen's Union (IBU), which had protested the Aqua Express permit, withdrew its objection. It was the only objection filed with the UTC on the proposal. The IBU said it expects the service to fail financially and doesn't want to spend the money fighting it.

Meanwhile, another company, Kitsap Ferry, plans to begin passenger-only service between Bremerton and Seattle Aug. 1 to supplement the car-ferry service. It was given a temporary permit from the UTC and has applied for a permanent one.

The two companies want to replace passenger-only service between Seattle and the Kitsap Peninsula eliminated by cash-strapped Washington State Ferries last September.

Aqua Express is a consortium formed by Argosy Cruises, Clipper Navigation ― which runs the Victoria Clipper ― Nichols Boat Builders and Tom Tougas, who runs a boat-tour company in Alaska. It bought the old state ferry Tyee, a 292-passenger vessel, to use on the route.




The private ventured was triggered by a Kitsap County vote last November that overwhelmingly rejected a ballot measure to pay for passenger-only service.

The Kitsap Transit Board in March voted to allow private operators to seek state permission to operate on the two routes. That was required because Kitsap Transit had the exclusive right to the routes and needed to relinquish it for the private operators to apply.

Aqua Express hopes to begin service in September or October. In its filing with the UTC, Aqua Express estimates it will serve 284,000 passengers a year and generate nearly $1.6 million in revenue.

In its proposal to the UTC, Aqua Express said it will charge passengers $5.25 one way, with discounted monthly passes. Kitsap Ferry proposes a $7 one-way fare from Bremerton.

Both companies said they will begin service during peak commuting time only. Aqua Express proposes its first boat would leave Kingston at 5:30 a.m. The last boat would leave Seattle at 7:20 p.m.

Susan Gilmore: 206-464-2054 or sgilmore@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Rezone bid could cost county money

By Emily Heffter
Times Snohomish County bureau

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Snohomish County's land-use troubles deepened last week when a state board said the County Council's repeated efforts to rezone 110 acres near Arlington could cost the county transportation money.

The Central Puget Sound Growth Management Hearings Board, for the first time in its history, recommended that Gov. Gary Locke withhold state tax money from Snohomish County to force the county to stop trying to make property slated for a car dealership in the Island Crossing area eligible for development.

Car dealer Tom Lane and Snohomish County Councilman Jeff Sax, R-Snohomish, dismissed the threat last week, saying the governor wouldn't go through with it.

A Locke spokesman said last week the governor had not finished reviewing the board's recommendation.

Island Crossing property


1995: The Snohomish County Council includes the property in an urban-growth area around Arlington. Environmental groups appeal, arguing the land is prime farmland. October 1997: Snohomish County Superior Court rules the land must be protected as farmland.

2001: The state Court of Appeals upholds the 1997 ruling.

2002: Car dealer Dwayne Lane and his son, Tom Lane, renew efforts to rezone the land.

September-October 2003: The County Council votes to make the land urban, meaning it could be developed. County Executive Bob Drewel vetoes the decision. The council overrides the veto.

Nov. 5, 2003: Gov. Gary Locke asks the state Department of Community, Trade and Economic Development to appeal the County Council's decision to the Central Puget Sound Growth Management Hearings Board.

Nov. 17, 2003: The Lanes petition to have Arlington annex the land.

April 2004: The state Boundary Review Board for Snohomish County supports annexation.

May 5: The growth-management hearings board rules against the County Council, automatically returning the land to its agricultural zoning.

May 24: The County Council votes to designate the property as urban again, citing a new study financed by the Lanes.

Thursday: The growth-management hearings board says the May decision was out of compliance with state law and recommends the governor impose financial sanctions against the county.




The Governor's Office has withheld state tax money to enforce the Growth Management Act once before. Then-Gov. Mike Lowry withheld $140,000 a month from Chelan County in 1995 when the county wouldn't apply stricter protections to farmland. When the county complied, the state refunded $866,000 in interest and road money it had withheld.

"I think that the board is not very happy with this council," said Snohomish County Councilman Dave Gossett, D-Mountlake Terrace, the only member of the five-member council to vote against rezoning the property. "This is an issue that's been done unto death."

Proponents of allowing development on the 110-acre parcel say it can't be farmed because it's too close to urban areas and Interstate 5. Environmentalists and an anti-sprawl group, 1000 Friends of Washington, have been fighting the change. They say the land is commercially significant farmland and believe building on it would cause flooding in the area.

The hearings board has ruled three times against rezoning the land, and a state Court of Appeals ruled against the change in 2001.

"No one is asking the County Council to do anything that would result in the loss of tax revenues to Snohomish County," Lane said in a statement. "That's a red herring designed to stir up public opinion."

The governor could withhold several types of revenue, Snohomish County Finance Director Roger Neumaier said, including some general-fund money. But the options are so broad that Neumaier said it's too early to put a figure on what could be at stake.

"The breadth of it is such that at this point we really need to hear from the governor in terms of what things he's considering," he said. "We just, on the executive's side, just don't want to be in this position where we appear to be challenging the state growth board."

The County Council has an executive session scheduled this week to discuss the issue, but the county has already agreed to appeal the board's decision to Superior Court.

Several members of the County Council have been vocal about their dislike for the hearings-board process. The three-member boards are appointed by the governor, so some councilmen say the boards are biased.

Sax called it "a bunch of hot air."

"I think it's a threat that the growth board basically has the authority to recommend that to the governor," he said.

County Council Chairman John Koster, R-Arlington, said the board's decision appeared to be more about "protecting the board's own sense of dignity" than about the county's policy. The county, he said, has had to engage in a "high-wire act" to balance the board's concerns with its own.

Emily Heffter: 425-783-0624 or eheffter@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Traffic watch

Blaine, Whatcom County: The International Peace Arch border crossing at Blaine will be closed from noon to 4 p.m. Sunday for an annual International Peace Arch Celebration. Northbound Interstate 5 between Highway 543 and Peace Arch Park will be closed and traffic detoured to the international truck crossing. Southbound I-5 also will be closed. Motorists are advised to use alternate routes.

Here & Now is compiled by Seattle Times staff reporter Charles E. Brown and news assistant Suesan Whitney Henderson. To submit an item, e-mail herenow@seattletimes.com or call 206-464-2226.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Thursday, June 17, 2004 - Page updated at 12:17 A.M.

Novelty Hill Road likely to be blocked for month

By Ashley Bach
Seattle Times Eastside bureau





 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

A portion of Novelty Hill Road, one of the lifelines to the remote Duvall, Carnation and Monroe areas, may be closed for a month this summer. The half-mile closure, from east of 243rd Avenue Northeast to West Snoqualmie Valley Road Northeast, would effectively eliminate the winding, steep road east of Redmond as a commuter route.

The project came as a surprise to many local officials already struggling with torturous traffic. In Duvall, which would see the biggest impact, drivers already take up to 40 minutes just to reach Redmond, Mayor Becky Nixon said.

"I have to fight this," she said. "I just can't believe they'd completely lock Duvall."

The project would be completed by Quadrant, a Weyerhaeuser subsidiary, as part of the company's large Redmond Ridge and Trilogy developments. A development agreement signed several years ago with King County requires the company to add a north shoulder and improve the road's drainage system, county officials said.

Quadrant says it has approval to close the road from July 12 to Aug. 8. The county says it must talk to neighboring cities before signing off, but officials say the summer closure is necessary.

"There aren't a lot of great ways to do this and we think the safest way to do this is with the closure," said Matt Nolan, county traffic engineer.

The construction would be done with large equipment on a twisty, narrow, two-lane road, Nolan said. Closing just one lane may not leave enough room to work and would require adding up to two months to the project. The summer months also avoid the rain that could make the steep hillsides dangerously unstable.

"The key here is to get out as quickly as possible," said Bill Boucher, Quadrant spokesman.

About 12,000 cars use the stretch of road each day, many of them traveling to the Eastside and Seattle from the Duvall area and Snohomish County.

The most popular detour may be taking Woodinville-Duvall Road and connecting with Avondale Road Northeast east of Woodinville. Drivers will also probably increase their use of Highways 203 and 202 and Northeast Union Hill Road, Boucher said.

At the intersection of Woodinville-Duvall and Highway 203, county officials expect traffic to increase by 10 percent.

Most of these roads are already congested, and some city officials worry that an intolerable commute will grow impossible. Nixon estimates 30 minutes could be added in the morning and an hour in the afternoon for Duvall commuters.

The county will be working on a seismic upgrade this summer on the Woodinville-Duvall Bridge, which may include periodic off-peak lane closures. The state is also installing a roundabout at Highway 203 and Northeast 124th Street, which will include daytime lane closures.

Nixon said the three concurrent projects only make things worse. "You're telling me they can't put this off until the roundabout is completed?"

Redmond Mayor Rosemarie Ives said she was disappointed she wasn't notified of the project sooner.

"It's an unfortunate trend with the county," she said. "It doesn't endear any of us."

Ashley Bach: 206-464-2567 or abach@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Tuesday, June 15, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Here and Now
Up and running




 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Seattle-Tacoma International Airport's new Concourse A opens for public use today. But for security reasons, the new concourse, like others at the airport, is open only to ticketed passengers. The 2,102-foot Concourse A, at the south end of the main terminal, includes 14 airline gates, a dozen new restaurants and shops, several pieces of new artwork and the airport's first moving sidewalks.

A new pick-your-plate plan

If you're getting rid of your vehicle, you now have the option of keeping your current license plates as long as you plan to transfer the plates to something similar.

Earlier this year, the state Legislature passed a law that changes the requirement that standard-issue license plates remain with a vehicle when the owner sells it.

The new law allows vehicle owners to remove their license plates when they sell or otherwise transfer ownership of a vehicle, and transfer them to an eligible replacement vehicle. But it costs an extra $10 for the privilege.

An eligible vehicle would be one that uses the same type and size of license plate. That means car plates can be transferred to another car but not a truck. Plates from a pickup can be transferred to another truck but not to a car.

In the past, only vehicle owners with personalized or specialty license plates were allowed to transfer the plates from vehicle to vehicle.

But you don't have to keep your plates. Owners still can leave their current plates on a vehicle when it is sold. Either way, the new option doesn't affect how much you'll pay for vehicle taxes and fees.

Today

The public can get an update on plans for replacing Highway 520's Evergreen Point Bridge across Lake Washington at an open house, hosted by the state Department of Transportation and Sound Transit, from 5 to 8 p.m. at the Museum of History & Industry, 2700 24th Ave. E., Seattle.




Agencies will discuss proposals for replacing the bridge, a major link between Seattle and Bellevue, including the latest on the four- and six-lane alternatives, an update on the eight-lane alternative, neighborhood lids, traffic analysis, and prospects for charging toll fees on the bridge.

A draft environmental-impact statement is to be published in about a year.

If you miss today's open house, a second one is scheduled at 5 p.m. Thursday at St. Luke's Lutheran Church, 3030 Bellevue Way N.E. in Bellevue.

Getting around

61 Detours ahead: Motorists traveling north through the Bellingham area should watch for detour signs to help get around construction and ramp closures along Interstate 5 this summer. Several exits and ramps are scheduled for closures during construction projects.

61 A free ride: Bicyclists now can ride free across the Hood Canal Bridge on Jefferson Transit buses instead of pedaling across the bridge in narrow bike lanes. New bus stops are on the east and west sides of the bridge.

Jefferson Transit runs a bus from Port Townsend to Poulsbo, Kitsap County, that crosses the bridge five times a day on weekdays and twice a day on weekends.

Because of construction work on the bridge this summer, pedestrians are not permitted to cross and bike lanes have been restricted.

Traffic watch

61 Issaquah: Up to two lanes of westbound Interstate 90 between Sunset Way and Front Street will be closed nightly through Thursday for road work. One lane will close at 7 p.m.; the second at 9, leaving only one lane open. All lanes will reopen by 6 a.m. the following days. Motorists should anticipate a rough road surface between Sunset Way and Front Street until the work is finished, which should be Friday morning if weather is favorable.

Here & Now is compiled by Seattle Times staff reporter Charles E. Brown and news assistant Suesan Whitney Henderson. To submit an item, e-mail herenow@seattletimes.com or call 206-464-2226.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Saturday, June 19, 2004 - Page updated at 01:33 A.M.

America's driving ambitions

By Jonathan Weisman
The Washington Post


RAUL RUBIERA / MIAMI HERALD, 2003 Bobby Kiel of Miami drives a Hummer H2, while his wife, Charon, drives a Mini Cooper.

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles


Related stories U.S. gas prices may have peaked

Other links
 Timeline of gas prices (93K PDF)


It can't be easy owning a Hummer these days. If you're not being mocked in television ads, you're cut off by hostile drivers or harassed by environmentalists. "A friend of mine told me he had a car full of nuns give him the finger," chuckled Leo Karl, of Hummer by Karl in New Canaan, Conn.

And to add insult to injury, a tank of gasoline will now run you at least $60. But are these much-maligned Hummer owners regretting their purchases?

"It hasn't slowed me down a bit," said Dan Johnson, an H2 owner in Rohrersville, Md. "Nobody wants to see the price (of gasoline) at $2 a gallon, but you've got to take it with a grain of salt. You don't buy this vehicle and expect it's going to be cheap maintenance."

With gas prices spiking and concern rising over oil imports from the volatile Middle East, it would stand to reason Americans are about to ditch their Hummers and Suburbans for the modern equivalent of those oddities of the 1970s: the AMC Gremlin and Pacer, the Volkswagen Rabbit and the Datsun B210. There has been an uptick in small-car interest, especially gas-sippers such as the Toyota Prius, which runs on gasoline and electricity, and some dip in large SUV sales. But more than likely, it will take much more than a $60 tank of gas to chase most drivers to a Mini Cooper.






Changing times

Since the price shocks of the 1970s, driving patterns have changed, commutes have lengthened, and family checkbooks have fattened. Even child car-seat laws have conspired to keep families out of tiny Honda Civics.

"There's a lot of consumer sentiment bound up in the car they want," said David Greene, a corporate fellow at Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Center for Transportation Analysis. "If you have your heart set on a pickup truck to haul your mulch, it's going to be hard to get you into a Mazda Miata. If you have six people in your family, it's going be hard to get you to buy a car that seats four."

Besides, Americans just like big.

"I am convinced Americans prefer to buy the largest car they can afford," said Bob Casey, curator of transportation at the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Mich. "If the largest car they can afford is a VW Rabbit, they will buy it, but if they can step up to something bigger, they will. It gets repeated again and again."

The recent jump in gas prices is not trivial. Only once before ― during a bleak stretch from 1979 to 1984 ― did the price of a gallon of regular gasoline top $2 (when adjusted for inflation). But automotive-industry analysts caution that circumstances today are fundamentally different from the oil shocks that stemmed from the 1973 Arab oil embargo and the 1979 Iranian revolution. And even back then, the reasons for ditching a Chevrolet Impala for a Dodge Omni were more complicated than simply price.

Automotive historians look at the 1970s as a remarkable shift in consumer behavior, but the motivations were multiple. What had been a monolithic market for outsized autos had begun fragmenting by the mid-1960s. Pushed by the success of the Volkswagen Beetle, Chevrolet began selling its relatively small Corvair, and Ford its Falcon, said Tom Libby, director of industry analysis at the Power Information Network, an affiliate of J.D. Power and Associates.

By 1970 and 1971, Ford was ready with the Pinto, and Chevrolet had the Vega.

But the Japanese automakers, Toyota, Honda and Datsun, began arriving on the market with cars that had the appeal of novelty, Greene said. Economy was secondary. And they secured their toehold just when the Arab nations slapped an oil embargo on the United States.

It was not so much the price of gas that pushed buyers into small cars as the gas lines that ensued when the federal government tried to hold prices down, Libby said. In today's dollars, prices crested at $1.74 in 1974, according to the Energy Department's Energy Information Administration.

"Long gas lines were this visible evidence to the consumer," Libby said. "There was like a panic. People were going to the gas station with their tanks three-quarters full because they were afraid there wasn't going to be any gas left." The power of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries proved to be ephemeral, but the cartel's actions were such a shock that people were convinced life at the gas pump would only get worse, Casey added. Sales of "regular-size" Chevrolets ― Impalas and Caprices ― plunged from 857,204 in 1973 to 552,051 in 1974. Ford sales of LTDs and other regular-size cars dropped from 693,084 to 408,192.

Small-car sales fell as well, but by much smaller numbers. The Datsun B210 and Honda Civic ― which could practically fit inside the passenger compartment of an LTD ― actually shot skyward.

But that does not draw a complete picture. Even with gas lines snaking around city blocks, Americans loved muscle. In a year when total U.S. car sales fell 23 percent, sales of so-called specialty cars ― Pontiac Firebirds, Chevrolet Camaros, Mercury Cougars and Ford Mustangs ― rose in 1974 to 14.4 percent of the market, from 10.3 percent the year before. Mustang sales nearly doubled, from 145,168 to 277,075.

And Americans moved back to their big cars as soon as they could. With gas lines gone and prices falling, the small-car share of the U.S. market skidded from 40.9 percent in 1976 to 31.7 percent in 1979.

Then came the Iranian revolution, the taking of American hostages in Tehran, the Iran-Iraq war, and we did it all over again. Practically overnight, the small-car market share jumped in 1980 to a record 42.7 percent. In 1981, the nation's top-selling car was the Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme. In 1982 it was the Ford Escort. The nation's long economic malaise helped push the trend to cheaper, smaller cars.

For Detroit, it was devastating. The Big Three automakers were ready, with a downsized General Motors fleet, the Chevrolet Citation and the Escort. But the Japanese were more ready, with Accords and Camrys that were simply better cars, Casey said.

This time, the consumer shift to Japan stuck. Only with the arrival in 1984 of the first modern sport-utility vehicle, the Jeep Cherokee, did Detroit see a future, Casey said. And sure enough, the small-car market-share slide soon began, from a peak of 43.8 percent in 1988 to 22.9 percent today.

Will history repeat itself again? Not likely, Greene said.

"People do care somewhat (about gas prices), but there are two fundamental things that have happened" since the early '80s, he said. "Number one is, people have become wealthier, and the more money they have, the less they care about the price of gasoline. Number two, for new passenger cars, we've already almost doubled our fuel economy since 1975. That makes the fuel component a much smaller part of owning a car."

More per gallon

In 1975, cars and light trucks averaged 13.1 miles per gallon. Thanks more to federal regulations than consumer preference, cars now drive 24.6 miles on a gallon, although surging sales of SUVs and their 17.9-miles-per-gallon average have dragged down overall fleet efficiency from a peak of 22.1 miles per gallon in 1987 to 20.8 miles per gallon today.

In 1985, gasoline and oil represented 19.9 percent of the cost of owning and operating a vehicle, Greene said. By 2002, the gas-oil portion stood at 9.7 percent. In a 1997 paper arguing for tougher, government-mandated fuel-efficiency standards, Greene made the case that price would not encourage efficiency. He calculated that if you include the loss of performance and size, an additional five miles per gallon represents a potential savings of maybe $100 over the life of a car.

"In other words," he wrote, "the incentive to the consumer is ... on the order of the cost of a set of floor mats."

The long drive in

The other problem is driving habits, said Daniel Lashof, a senior scientist and energy expert at the Natural Resources Defense Council. If every SUV owner traded in for a passenger sedan, the nation would save enough oil to ditch the 2.3 million barrels of oil a day imported from the Middle East, Lashof said, but that is not likely to happen without government intervention.

Suburban sprawl has Americans driving farther, and traffic has them stuck in their seats, preferably Corinthian leather surrounded by a spacious SUV cab. In 1990, 30.5 percent of workers spent at least 30 minutes traveling to work, according to the Census Bureau. By 2000, 34.5 percent did. Between 1990 and 2001, total vehicle miles traveled in the United States jumped by 574,424, or 29 percent.

The number of commuters who car-pooled, took public transit, rode motorcycles or walked to work all fell significantly.

SUVs targeted

The one tangible sign of anxiety over gasoline usage appears to be the abuse being hurled at SUV owners, especially Hummer owners. The radical environmental group Earth Liberation Front boasts of a half-dozen attacks on SUV dealerships last year, including one in West Covina, Calif., that did $2.5 million in damage. The Web site FUH2.com encourages a center-finger salute to the vehicle, and HonkatHummers.com sells bumper stickers with its own prescription.

Not that the owners seem to mind. Said Karl: "The true Hummer owners, the people most fervent about it, take it as a compliment. They're individuals. They like to stand out in a crowd."

Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Tuesday, June 29, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Boeing Field dispute delays runway funds

By Keith Ervin
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
A $6.7 million runway project at Boeing Field has hit a snag because some Metropolitan King County Council members want to see the airport do more to dampen aircraft noise in their districts. The County Council deleted second-year funding for the project in May, and a new budget measure submitted Friday by County Executive Ron Sims didn't include the runway.

Sims is expected to resubmit his request.

The council's budget chairman, Larry Gossett, said the denial of funds was not intended to kill the runway project but to give the council more time to study progress on the noise issue.

King County International Airport, as Boeing Field is formally known, has enough federal and local money to begin the project this summer. Officials had asked for an additional $3.7 million that would allow the work to be done in one year instead of two.

The project would shift the airport's main, 10,000-foot runway 880 feet north to expand a federally required safety zone at the runway's south end. Railroad tracks and a road intrude in the existing safety zone.

The airport serves Boeing, air-cargo companies, flight schools and private and corporate airplanes.

Gossett said there was "nothing atypical, unwarranted or surprising" about the council's denial of runway funds, given members' keen interest in reducing noise.

Gossett and three other council members represent Seattle neighborhoods heavily affected by airport noise: Gossett represents Beacon Hill and Leschi; Dow Constantine, West Seattle; Dwight Pelz, Georgetown and Skyway; and Council Chairman Larry Phillips, who lives in Magnolia, an area below the flight path of many planes landing at Boeing Field.

Phillips, the council's most outspoken critic of aircraft noise, has raised the issue repeatedly with county Transportation Director Harold Taniguchi.

Continuing flights over Magnolia are a sore point for residents there and on Queen Anne Hill, Phillips said, because many flights could be redirected to airspace over Elliott Bay without affecting other neighborhoods. Noise-sensitive residents are awoken as early as 4:30 a.m. by large cargo planes making course corrections and lowering landing gear as they pass over the Magnolia Bridge.




Officials of Boeing Field and the Federal Aviation Administration are encouraging pilots to voluntarily shift from a route over Magnolia to one over Elliott Bay when weather permits. The airport last month began distributing thousands of brochures to pilots promoting the Elliott Bay route, but progress hasn't been fast enough for Phillips.

"I have been rational for 10 years in trying to get them to do the right thing," Phillips said. "On occasion I try to let them know I like to be a wild-and-crazy guy."

Neither Phillips nor Taniguchi would confirm or deny rumors that Phillips threatened to block runway funding unless he got assurances that planes will be banned over his neighborhood under most weather conditions.

Airport officials have made some progress in reducing aircraft noise.

Since the County Council mandated a series of noise-reduction efforts six years ago, the airport has banned "engine run-ups" for maintenance at night and has initiated a "Fly Quiet" program that advises pilots to fly as high above ground level as safety allows and to approach the airport from Elliott Bay instead of Magnolia in clear weather.

The airport also is studying construction of a "hush house" to dampen the noise of engine run-ups. For close-in neighborhoods, such as Georgetown, just north of the airport's two runways, officials plan to install noise insulation in existing buildings.

In July, air-traffic controllers are scheduled to offer Global Positioning System coordinates for Elliott Bay to pilots of incoming flights. The airport also is initiating a study on the feasibility of shifting instrument landings to Elliott Bay.

Taniguchi said relations with the FAA ― which provides most money for airport improvements ― are delicate, and it's too early to tell how successful voluntary measures will be.

Airport Manager Robert Burke said there are signs the voluntary program is working. "We're getting a lot of calls saying we're getting a lot of airplanes over the water. That's exactly what we want."

Keith Ervin: 206-464-2105 or kervin@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Thursday, June 24, 2004 - Page updated at 04:44 P.M.

Future of monorail fares not yet decided

By Mike Lindblom
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>

Related stories Archive: Monorail debate raises 69,000-rider question

Other links
 Seattle City Council: Monorail


In its recent advertising campaign, the Seattle Monorail Project promised to make life easier for transit riders by providing "convenient transfers to light rail, buses and ferries." However, the agency has yet to answer a pair of basic questions about making Seattle's transit lines compatible:

What will a monorail ticket cost? And will people have to pay extra to transfer from a bus to the monorail?

The answers might help determine whether the proposed Green Line monorail can attract the hoped-for 69,000 riders a day.

Half the daily passengers are supposed to reach monorail stations on a bus, according to a 2002 ridership study ― and the agency assumed those people would pay a half-fare transfer fee.

Under the cheapest scenario in that study, bus users would pay $1.50 for a Metro transit ticket plus another 75 cents to continue downtown on the monorail.

The study, by URS, a national transportation consulting firm, found that raising ticket or transfer prices higher than that would generate more revenue but drive away thousands of riders.

City Council vote Monday


The Seattle City Council is considering a proposed "transitway agreement" that sets conditions for the 14-mile Green Line monorail to be built on city streets and sidewalks. The deal, scheduled for a vote on Monday, covers issues such as financial liability, skybridges, construction permits, street improvements around the stations and possibly design. Related council meetings are tomorrow at 9:30 a.m. and 2 p.m., and Monday at 9:30 a.m. and 2 p.m. at City Hall, 600 Fourth Ave.




City Councilman Jim Compton hopes to guarantee an affordable ride before the city signs a key transitway agreement Monday with the monorail agency. He plans to introduce legislation this week to require assurances that a monorail trip will cost no more than a bus, and offer transfers for free or minimal cost.

Unless the council acts now, it will lose its leverage, he said.

"It's nuts not to have a common fare structure. Moreover, the fares should be absolutely transferable," said Compton, who endorsed the voter-approved 14-mile monorail linking Ballard, downtown and West Seattle during the 2002 campaign.

Monorail executives say it's too soon to worry about rate compatibility. The first segment, Key Arena to Westlake Center, will not open for more than three years, with the rest of the line completed two years later.

"Right now, our emphasis is on construction of the system," monorail Chairman Tom Weeks said recently. He said tickets would cost "the same as a bus."

Fare policies could someday force monorail leaders to choose between two goals: whether to attract more riders, or meet its commitment to recover all its operating costs by 2020. Besides the farebox, the Seattle Monorail Project (SMP) intends to raise money from advertising, leases by small retailers at some stations, and higher-priced party trains.

Monorail critics believe the break-even promise would wither under scrutiny, and say the city should conduct an independent investigation of monorail finances, including fares and ridership.

Peter Sherwin, spokesman for Monorail Now, said he's concerned that if the city strives to guarantee a perfect system by delving into fare policies now, that could decrease the chance of getting a rapid-transit system built.

Only one-fifth of U.S. transit systems charge for transfers. For every 10-percent boost in fares, a transit line loses an average 4 percent of riders, according to a 1991 study by the American Public Transit Association.

Portland uses a single-fare system for its trains and buses. San Francisco's Muni trains and buses share joint tickets, but riders have to pay again to switch onto the regional Bay Area Rapid Transit lines.

Vancouver, B.C., often cited as a role model by the SMP, lets people combine trips on the elevated SkyTrain, buses, trolleys and the SeaBus ferry for a single ticket costing $2 Canadian in the city ($1.46 U.S.). There are higher fees for crossing into the suburbs.

Even though most stations are surrounded by high-rise housing, about 80 percent of SkyTrain's 177,000 daily passengers combine the trip with a feeder bus. Transit leaders never considered making them pay twice.

"They'd be mighty pissed off if you said, 'Not only are you going to have to pay once for the local bus, you have to pay more on SkyTrain,' " said former city Councillor Gordon Price, an expert on urban growth issues. "If you want to get people on transit, convenience is a factor."

Sound Transit's light-rail line, the Seattle area's other proposed new transit system, plans on offering a shared fare with buses and free transfers.

Sherwin, the monorail spokesman, acknowledges that "from a rider standpoint, clearly no extra charge would be superior. On the other hand, if there was a small additional charge for using two systems ― 25, 50 cents ― that would most likely be acceptable."

The monorail agency expects to replace many express bus routes, funneling people to the trains. Ideally, feeder buses would reach the Ballard and West Seattle monorail stations every 10 to 15 minutes, said Jim Jacobson, Metro deputy general manager. At times, Metro has questioned whether enough money will be available.

No new park-and-ride lots are planned along the monorail route. Instead, monorail board members selected station sites where buses can easily drop off people. They have required potential builders to design fare cards or "smart cards," to fit with the regional system.

Typically, transit agencies get rid of transfer fees when the smart cards arrive, cutting the costs to draw more riders, said Chung Chung Tam, a Chicago transit official who heads the American Public Transit Association's revenue committee.

Tam also said that, in some cities, transfer fees won't harm ridership if the rail system provides a significant time savings.

Bus rider Kate Endle, grasping a hand rail as her bus from West Seattle sped down the Alaska Way Viaduct, said she's willing to pay a surcharge, but only if a monorail speeds up her commute.

"It would have to be a lot faster than a couple minutes."

Mike Lindblom: 206-515-5631 or mlindblom@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Wednesday, June 23, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Editorial
Necessary safety steps





JIM BATES / THE SEATTLE TIMES The ferry Wenatchee pulls out of the Coleman docks on Elliott Bay.

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

A Washington state ferry might be as much of a terrorist target as an airplane. There are dangers worth safeguarding against, as the Washington State Patrol's new program for vehicle inspections tries to do.

For now, the program is a necessity for a city and a region at risk of a terrorist attack.

The program responds differently at three different levels of risk, the levels being determined by the Coast Guard. At heightened levels of risk, there are searches; at the highest level, the ferry system shuts down.

At normal levels of risk, which is now and most of the time, the police will use dogs to patrol the lines of cars in some, but not all, ferry queues. The dogs are trained to smell out explosives ― and only that, the State Patrol says. These include some lawful things ― Fourth of July fireworks, shotgun cartridges, warning flares.

Capt. Fred Fakkema of the State Patrol says that means that if a dog smells something recognizable, "We would have to determine why the dog is alerting on that car." That might mean a talk with the driver or a search of the car.

This is different, and better, than the procedure tried briefly two years ago. Then, the idea was to search every 15th car. The problem was that it let 93 percent of vehicles through without any examination whatever, and chose the remaining 7 percent without regard to evidence.

It avoided ethnic profiling but wasn't effective. In addition, there wasn't a law that authorized it.

Now, there is the federal Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002. Equally important, there are dogs, which provide something like probable cause without the odor of bias. There are also common-sense security rules. For example, without the captain's permission, no one can board the ferry and get off before it departs, because that person may have left behind a bomb.

Still, these new rules are an imposition, just like X-raying shoes at airports. For island residents and commuters, police dogs in the ferry queue will be a daily reminder of how the world has changed.

We hope we can get back to the good old days of boarding the ferry simply by paying the fee and driving on. In the present state of the world it is wiser to do things a more intrusive and annoying way.


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company



Friday, June 25, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Sound Transit told to forget monorail

By Eric Pryne
Seattle Times staff reporter

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
When and if it expands, Sound Transit should stick with light rail, commuter rail and buses, and forget about monorail, the agency's planners said yesterday. "We want to focus on the three lines of business we started and make them even better," said Paul Matsuoka, Sound Transit's policy and planning officer.

Sound Transit has just started exploring the possibility of submitting a "Phase Two" package of transit improvements to voters that would build on the "Sound Move" plan approved in 1996. A draft study won't be out until fall; the Sound Transit board won't decide what to include in the new package until next spring at the earliest.

The planners' recommendation that monorail be dropped from consideration now sets up the first big decision in that planning process. About one-third of the comments Sound Transit has received so far have urged the agency to study monorail as an option.

Cleve Stockmeyer, a member of the Seattle Monorail Project board and chairman of Citizens for King County Monorail, said taking monorail off the table now would be premature.

"We're not saying, 'Do monorail.' We're just saying, 'Study it,' " Stockmeyer said.

The Sound Transit board could make a decision July 8.

Monorail has advantages, Matsuoka told the board yesterday.

But grafting monorail onto existing light rail or commuter rail lines could force riders to make transfers that wouldn't be necessary if those lines were simply extended, he said. "Should you be changing technologies in the middle of the corridor?"

Monorail also would be incompatible with some decisions state and regional officials have made about high-capacity transit, Matsuoka added. Officials already have chosen "bus rapid transit" for I-405, for instance.

Transportation consultants Parsons Brinckerhoff Quade & Douglas also recommended against further study of a monorail in a report to Sound Transit this month. It's generally not as cheap or as flexible as buses or light rail, which can be built on the surface, the report said. Those points are valid, Stockmeyer said, "but if congestion is the problem, then speed of travel is the answer. ... People know monorails don't get stuck in traffic."




Eric Pryne: 206-464-2231 or epryne@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Tuesday, June 22, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Public opts for tunnel to replace viaduct

By Susan Gilmore
Seattle Times staff reporter

 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

It's the most expensive option, but replacing the damaged Alaskan Way Viaduct with a tunnel is also the most popular of five alternatives for a new viaduct. When the state released its environmental-impact statement (EIS) for viaduct replacement, it asked for public comment; 239 of 664 responses supported the tunnel, documents released yesterday show.

Rebuilding the existing viaduct, favored by 188 people, was second-most popular. Least popular were a bypass tunnel, supported by 18 people, and a surface street, backed by 12.

The state Department of Transportation also released new, lower cost estimates for some of the five alternatives. It plans to announce a preferred alternative late this summer. Here are the options and what the public said:

The tunnel

Cost for this alternative had been estimated at $3.6 billion to $4.1 billion. With the new figures, $3.4 billion to $4 billion, it's still the most expensive.

Backers say a tunnel provides the best opportunity to connect the waterfront to downtown and to redevelop the waterfront with public open space. Long-term benefits, they say, are worth the higher cost. Tunnel backers include: Allied Arts, Historic Seattle, the Downtown Seattle Association, Diamond Parking, the Greater Seattle Chamber of Commerce and the Port of Seattle.

Opponents point to cost, dislike of driving in tunnels and loss of views.

Rebuild

Cost estimates for rebuilding the viaduct in its existing location, including ramps at Seneca and Columbia streets, had been $3.2 billion to $3.5 billion. The new estimates: $2.7 billion to $3.1 billion. Supporters, who include the Ballard Interbay North Manufacturing Industrial Council, the North Seattle Industrial Association and 119 residents of Ballard and Magnolia, say rebuilding would protect traffic capacity and views and cut costs. Opponents cite the barrier between downtown and the waterfront and noise.

Aerial




This would replace the viaduct in its existing location, but with wider lanes and with shoulders. Cost estimates have dropped from $3.2 billion to $3.5 billion to $2.7 billion to $3.2 billion.

Backers say it would preserve views and enhance safety. Opponents say it would cut into waterfront open space and separate downtown from the water.

Supporters include the Admiral Community Council and the Ballard District Council.

Bypass tunnel

This would replace the viaduct with a four-lane tunnel along the central waterfront, and Alaskan Way would grow from four to six lanes. Projected costs, $3.1 billion to $3.6 billion, are unchanged.

Backers like the lower costs. No organizations, elected officials or agencies supported this option.

Surface

The cheapest option, an at-grade six-lane roadway along Alaskan Way, is estimated to cost $2.3 billion to $2.7 billion. Supporters like the price and shorter construction time and say this may be the only option that can be funded. No organizations backed this option.

Eighty-six people, including supporters of the People's Waterfront Coalition and Seattle City Councilman Peter Steinbrueck, back a "no-replacement" alternative, and want the state to study simply removing the viaduct. Project manager Maureen Sullivan said doing nothing is unfeasible because traffic volume must be maintained.

The final EIS is scheduled to be released in December.

Susan Gilmore: 206-464-2054 or sgilmore@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Wednesday, June 16, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

Road construction report
Areas slow going and no going








 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

Stanwood area

1 284th Street Northwest: One lane will be shut east of 68th Avenue Northwest from 7 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. weekdays through July 1.

Marysville area

2 108th Street Northeast: One lane will be closed between 52nd and 54th drives northeast from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. weekdays through Monday.

Granite Falls area

3 Ray Gray Road: One lane will be closed from Crooked Mile Road to the end of the road through July 2 for the repair of a washout.

Snohomish area

4 103rd Avenue Southeast: One lane will be shut between Bunk Foss Road and 32nd Street Southeast from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays through Aug. 13 for the replacement of power poles.

5 Foster Slough Road: The road will be closed at the 7300 block through July 30 for emergency repairs. Detours have been posted.

Lynnwood area




6 Ash Way: One lane will be closed between Madison Way and 153rd Street Southwest from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. today, tomorrow and Friday.

Mill Creek area

7 146th Street Southwest: The street will be closed between Cascadian Way and Meadow Road from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. today and tomorrow for installation of a sewer line.

8 Sunset Road: One lane will be closed between 169th Street Southeast and Strumme Road, along with a lane on 169th between Sunset and 35th Avenue Southeast, from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. today, tomorrow and Friday.

9 180th Street Southeast: A lane will be shut between Sunset Road and 51st Avenue Southeast from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays through Oct. 29. In addition, a lane of 43rd Avenue Southeast will be closed at Highway 524 and 204th, 200th and 196th streets southeast from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. weekdays through Oct. 29. A water main is being installed.

Bothell area

10 Logan Road: One lane will be shut at Elberta Road and on Elberta between Logan and 208th Place Southwest from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. weekdays through June 25.

Monroe area

11 191st Avenue Southeast: The street will be closed just south of Rainier View Road Southeast until 7 a.m. Friday.

Compiled by Seattle Times Snohomish County bureau news assistant Laurie Parker.





Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Friday, June 18, 2004 - Page updated at 12:44 A.M.

Eastside Digest
Expect road closures for Derby Days events




 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles

The city of Redmond will close some roads July 10 for the annual Derby Days bicycle races and celebration. Redmond Way from 161st Avenue Northeast to 166th Avenue Northeast will be closed from 7:30 a.m. until noon. From 8:30 a.m. until noon, there will be closures on Northeast 83rd, between 161st and 166th, and on both 161st and 166th, between 83rd and Redmond Way.

The city advises that primary detours from the north and east of the downtown area are Highway 520 and the Bear Creek Parkway. The best east-west bypass would be Northeast 124th Street or Northeast 116th Street. On the west side of town, use Willows Road.

There will also be other closures. For more information, visit www.redmond.gov and click on the Derby Days icon.

Woodinville Family Fourth of July celebration planned

The Woodinville Family Fourth of July Fireworks Celebration will begin at 6 p.m. July 4 at J.B. Instant Lawn.

The 10th annual event will feature free music, games and arts-and-crafts events for children. A 20-minute fireworks show will begin at 10:30 p.m. From 9:45 p.m. to midnight, 145th Street Northeast and surrounding streets will close.

Information: 425-984-2346.



Friday, June 11, 2004 - Page updated at 12:00 A.M.

White River lineup




 E-mail this article
 Print this article
 Search archive
 Most e-mailed articles


Other links
 Search event listings


The White River Amphitheatre took a lot of flak in its premiere season last year for problems related to traffic and parking. This year, the venue has added a number of improvements designed to improve traffic flow into and out of the parking areas.

Not much can be done to ease freeway congestion, especially at the intersection of state Highways 18 and 164. Weekdays are especially bad, as concert traffic meets the last of the commute. It's not unusual for the drive from Seattle to the site to take more than two hours because of the congestion.

White River has expanded its parking capacity and paved more parking lots. Signage has been improved, and staffing has been increased and better trained. The free shuttle service from the Auburn SuperMall will now access and exit through a separate venue entrance, with quicker exits promised at the end of the concerts. Close-in premiere parking is available and can be purchased in advance at Ticketmaster outlets.

Plan ahead. Check the Web site, www.whiteriverconcerts.com, for complete information, alternate routes and maps.

White River lineup

Here's the performance schedule, with ticket prices. Tickets are at Ticketmaster outlets (206-628-0888 and www.ticketmaster.com, or at www.cc.com).

7 p.m. Wednesday: No Doubt, Blink-182, Phantom Planet ($25-$53.50).

7 p.m. June 23: Kiss, Poison, Z02 ($29.50-$75).

8 p.m. July 1: Fleetwood Mac ($49.50-$150.50).

8 p.m. July 2: Rush ($36.25-$88.75).




7 p.m. July 11: John Mayer, Switchfoot, DJ Logic ($42.75-$48.75).

Noon July 14-15: Lollapalooza ($35.50-$59.50).

5 p.m. July 24: Jessica Simpson, Ryan Cabrera, Kimberly Locke, JoJo ($25-$48.50).

7 p.m. July 25: Alanis Morissette, Barenaked Ladies, Nellie McKay ($25-$50).

9 a.m. July 27: Ozzfest ($49.50-$79.50).

7:30 p.m. Aug 15: Chicago/Earth, Wind & Fire ($25.50-$45.50).

8 p.m. Aug. 28: Josh Groban ($29.50-$85.50).

7 p.m. Sept. 10: Deep Purple, Joe Satriani, Thin Lizzy ($21.25-$41.25).

7:30 p.m. Oct. 8: Sting, Annie Lennox, Dominic Miller ($38.75-$101.25).


― Patrick MacDonald


Friday, June 25, 2004 - Page updated at 01:09 A.M.

Cities eye railway corridor

By Natalie Singer
Seattle Times Eastside bureau

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Regional planning officials voted yesterday to spend $660,000 and 18 months studying the possible acquisition of a little-used 40-mile railroad corridor that slices through the Eastside. If the corridor, owned by Burlington Northern Santa Fe, is eventually transferred into public ownership, it could be turned into a bicycle and pedestrian trail. Under a federal law known as "railbanking," the route could also one day be used for other transportation modes such as light rail. The corridor, which stretches from Renton to Snohomish, now carries the Spirit of Washington dinner train, as well as limited freight shipments.

The process of applying for the federal funds already has begun and will face final approval by several agencies this fall. If the money is allocated, the study could get under way in January.

In a preliminary inquiry earlier this year, most of the cities along the Renton-to-Snohomish corridor expressed support for preserving the route, which Burlington Northern is interested in selling.

The railroad has indicated that if there's no public interest, the right of way ― which stretches at least 100 feet wide along the line ― could be sold piecemeal to private buyers.

"They just aren't making any more railroad right of ways," said Pierce County Executive John Ladenburg, a member of the Puget Sound Regional Council's executive board, which approved the study yesterday. The opportunity to purchase such a long chunk of prime real estate is rare, Ladenburg added.

But some leaders also cautioned against committing to buying the line before they know how costly, and complicated, it could be. There is no cost estimate yet ― that, along with the environmental impacts and possible future uses, would be determined during the study.

"I support this," said Bellevue Councilman Conrad Lee, but "let's take a look at what benefit [could come from] this investment."

"It is so complex," said Redmond Councilwoman Nancy McCormick. Her city has spent three years trying to acquire a 1.8-mile spur of the rail corridor to build a trail. "You're going back to the 1800s researching property deeds and records."

Tacoma Councilman Mike Lonergan was the only member yesterday who did not vote in favor of the study ― he abstained. "I just have reservations that, while it's only $660,000, what's next? What are we getting ourselves into?" he said.

Natalie Singer: 206-464-2704 or nsinger@seattletimes.com


Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company

Friday, July 02, 2004 - Page updated at 06:39 P.M.

Winnies rollin' on: Call of the road louder than click of the gas pump

By Jack Broom
Seattle Times staff reporter


ALAN BERNER / THE SEATTLE TIMES It's the life of leisure for George and Julia Braun, RV owners, with Bob, the neighborhood cat that has adopted them. The Brauns have made five cross-country trips and love to gather with other Winnebago owners.

</TEXT></DOC><DOC><TEXT>
Standing outside a Winnebago motor home that nearly fills their Sea-Tac driveway, George and Julia Braun insist rising gas prices won't keep them from their favorite hobby.

"We don't smoke and we don't drink," said Julia Braun, "Gasoline is our fix."

A few miles away at a campground in Kent, Wayne Robinson of Henderson, Nev., says a day's drive in his new 32-foot-rig can easily burn $100 in gasoline. "Obviously, it's disappointing. But is it going to make a major change in our plans? No."

On a computer in his RV, Robinson checks the Web to compare gas prices at stations along his route. And when he and his wife, Kay, reach a destination, they may keep the motor home parked a little longer and make more side trips in the Saturn SL2 they tow. But their plans for cross-country travel remain intact.

Gas-mileage comparison


Just for fun, here's the mileage some vehicles are rated as getting on a gallon of gasoline.

Winnebago Brave: 7-10*

Range Rover: 16

Dodge Durango: 21


Lincoln Town Car: 25

Chevrolet Monte Carlo: 32


Honda Accord: 34

Volkswagen Golf: 46


Toyota Prius (hybrid electric): 51

Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. *Manufacturer's estimate for vehicle class; motor homes are not mileage-rated by EPA.




Even the average American may wince at high gasoline prices. But that doesn't mean RV-ers ― folks who haul mammoth rigs with mileage measured in single digits ― are about to abandon their on-the-road lifestyle.

"When you buy an RV, you know you're going to be paying a lot for gasoline," said George Braun, "So it really isn't any big surprise."

In fact, industry experts say the baby-boom generation's march toward retirement is going to mean a steady increase in motor homes on the highway.

"Some 350,000 people turn 50 each month in the United States, providing an enormous and growing pool of potential (RV) buyers for at least the next decade," according to a report published by the independent business-research firm, Robert W. Baird & Co. of Milwaukee.

The typical motor-home owner, the report said, is 59, married and has an average family income of $56,000. The industry has also benefited from the post-Sept. 11 reluctance of many Americans to fly. Last year's sales of 289,000 motor homes and towable-trailers was the highest since 1978, according to Statistical Surveys.

The Brauns travel with a map showing Costco locations, and, without venturing too far out of their way, have paid up to 20 cents less per gallon than they've seen at other stations. In a rig like theirs, which the Brauns say gets about seven miles to the gallon, a 50-cent-per-gallon gas price increase ― about what prices increased nationally in the past year ― adds $70 to the cost of driving 1,000 miles. It's an adjustment many RV-ers may make by cutting back on restaurant meals or other expenses.

In a survey for the Web site Funroads.com, 91 percent of RV owners said they are still taking their scheduled summer trips despite the boost in gas prices. While 46 percent said they might scale back their travels somewhat, 45 percent said gasoline would have to hit $10 a gallon before they seriously alter their plans.

Road is a lifestyle


ALAN BERNER / THE SEATTLE TIMES Figurines decorate the dashboard of the Brauns' RV.



SeaTac RV-ers George Braun, 70, and Julia, 67, are veterans of the motor-home lifestyle, with five cross-country trips under their belts. He retired in 1995 as a quality-assurance inspector for Boeing, ending a 35-year career with the company. She was secretary-treasurer of the Musicians Association of Seattle.

Now she's president of the "Evergreen Winnies," a 60-member chapter of Winnebago owners who enjoy group gatherings, such as a Memorial Day event that drew 154 motor coaches to the Chelan County Fairgrounds in Cashmere.

When RV'ers get together, she said, the agenda is "fun, friendship and food ― usually too much food."

Wayne Robinson, 55, is part of the baby-boom generation. He retired this year ("Elvis's birthday" he notes) as manager of the water-sewer utility in Henderson, near Las Vegas, where his wife Kay, 65, dealt poker.

The Robinsons are spending six weeks in the Puget Sound area, visiting a son and grandkids in Burien, seeing the sights of Seattle its surroundings.

Their Fleetwood Southwind gets six to nine miles a gallon, depending on how many hills they climb or headwinds they buck. For the next year or so, the vehicle isn't just their hobby, it's their home. They sold their Nevada house and expect to travel a year or two before deciding where to settle down.

From here, they may visit British Columbia before heading east to see the Badlands of South Dakota, then on to see friends and relatives in the Midwest.

"Our plans are very fluid," Robinson said. "That's what we like about it."

Two drivers of the rig


ALAN BERNER / THE SEATTLE TIMES Wayne Robinson of Henderson, Nev., at a campground in Kent, says a day's drive in his new 32-foot-rig can easily burn $100 in gas. But he says that won't determine major changes in his travel plans.



The Brauns took a year comparing models and prices before buying their first RV, a 29-footer, in 1993. Now they're on their fourth motor home, a 32-foot Winnebago Brave they purchased just two weeks ago.

Among its amenities: a dinette that can seat five, a queen-size bed, a sofa bed, a bathroom with shower and tub, a three-burner range top, oven, microwave oven, sink, refrigerator and freezer. And when the rig is parked, sections of the living area and bedroom slide outward to boost the living space inside.

Through the years, the Brauns have increased the distance and duration of their trips. "I told her we could do this if she does some of the driving." said George Braun, who estimates his wife does about a third of the driving.

Last year, a three-month odyssey took them from SeaTac to Louisiana to see a nephew in the Army who had just returned from Iraq, to Florida to see Disney World and attend an RV rally, up to New Jersey to see their oldest son and hit another RV rally. From there they went down to South Carolina to see a granddaughter graduate from college and get married, and then, on their way back home, a stop at Moses Lake for one more RV rally. Total miles: 9,217.

The same trip, based on national gas-price statistics, could cost about $650 more in gasoline this year. But the Brauns say they expect to log fewer miles this year.

"It's not because of the price of gasoline," insists George Braun. "We just don't have as many family things going on."

Jack Broom: 206-464-2222 or jbroom@seattletimes.com



Copyright 08 2004 The Seattle Times Company















